DIAPSALMATA[1]


What is a poet? An unhappy man who conceals profound anguish in his
heart, but whose lips are so fashioned that when sighs and groans pass
over them they sound like beautiful music. His fate resembles that of
the unhappy men who were slowly roasted by a gentle fire in the tyrant
Phalaris' bull--their shrieks could not reach his ear to terrify
him, to him they sounded like sweet music. And people flock about the
poet and say to him: do sing again; which means, would that new
sufferings tormented your soul, and: would that your lips stayed
fashioned as before, for your cries would only terrify us, but your
music is delightful. And the critics join them, saying: well done, thus
must it be according to the laws of æsthetics. Why, to be sure, a critic
resembles a poet as one pea another, the only difference being that he
has no anguish in his heart and no music on his lips. Behold, therefore
would I rather be a swineherd on Amager,[2] and be understood by the
swine than a poet, and misunderstood by men.


In addition to my numerous other acquaintances I have still one more
intimate friend--my melancholy. In the midst of pleasure, in the
midst of work, he beckons to me, calls me aside, even though I remain
present bodily. My melancholy is the most faithful sweetheart I have
had--no wonder that I return the love!

Of all ridiculous things the most ridiculous seems to me, to be
busy--to be a man who is brisk about his food and his work.
Therefore, whenever I see a fly settling, in the decisive moment, on
the nose of such a person of affairs; or if he is spattered with mud
from a carriage which drives past him in still greater haste; or the
drawbridge opens up before him; or a tile falls down and knocks him
dead, then I laugh heartily. And who, indeed, could help laughing?
What, I wonder, do these busy folks get done? Are they not to be
classed with the woman who in her confusion about the house being
on fire carried out the fire-tongs? What things of greater account, do
you suppose, will they rescue from life's great conflagration?


Let others complain that the times are wicked. I complain that they
are paltry; for they are without passion. The thoughts of men are thin
and frail like lace, and they themselves are feeble like girl
lace-makers. The thoughts of their hearts are too puny to be sinful.
For a worm it might conceivably be regarded a sin to harbor thoughts
such as theirs, not for a man who is formed in the image of God. Their
lusts are staid and sluggish, their passions sleepy; they do their duty,
these sordid minds, but permit themselves, as did the Jews, to trim the
coins just the least little bit, thinking that if our Lord keep tab of
them ever so carefully one might yet safely venture to fool him a bit.
Fye upon them! It is therefore my soul ever returns to the Old Testament
and to Shakespeare. There at least one feels that one is dealing with
men and women; there one hates and loves, there one murders one's
enemy and curses his issue through all generations--there one sins.


Just as, according to the legend,[3] Parmeniscus in the Trophonian
cave lost his ability to laugh, but recovered it again on the island
of Delos at the sight of a shapeless block which was exhibited as the
image of the goddess Leto: likewise did it happen to me. When I was
very young I forgot in the Trophonian cave how to laugh; but when I
grew older and opened my eyes and contemplated the real world, I had
to laugh, and have not ceased laughing, ever since. I beheld that the
meaning of life was to make a living; its goal, to become Chief Justice;
that the delights of love consisted in marrying a woman with ample
means; that it was the blessedness of friendship to help one another
in financial difficulties; that wisdom was what most people supposed
it to be; that it showed enthusiasm to make a speech, and courage, to
risk being fined 10 dollars; that it was cordiality to say "may it agree
with you" after a repast; that it showed piety to partake of the
communion once a year. I saw that and laughed.


A strange thing happened to me in my dream. I was rapt into the
Seventh Heaven. There sat all the gods assembled. As a special
dispensation I was granted the favor to have one wish. "Do you wish
for youth," said Mercury, "or for beauty, or power, or a long life; or
do you wish for the most beautiful woman, or any other of the many fine
things we have in our treasure trove? Choose, but only one thing!" For
a moment I was at a loss. Then I addressed the gods in this wise: "Most
honorable contemporaries, I choose one thing--that I may always
have the laughs on my side." Not one god made answer, but all began
to laugh. From this I concluded that my wish had been granted and
thought that the gods knew how to express themselves with good taste;
for it would surely have been inappropriate to answer gravely: your
wish has been granted.


[Footnote 1: Interlude (of aphorisms). Selection.]

[Footnote 2: A flat island south of the capital, called the "Kitchen
Garden of Copenhagen."]

[Footnote 3: Told by Athenaios.]




IN VINO VERITAS (THE BANQUET)


It was on one of the last days in July, at ten o'clock in the
evening, when the participants in that banquet assembled together.
Date and year I have forgotten; indeed, this would be interesting only
to one's memory of details, and not to one's recollection of the
contents of what experience. The "spirit of the occasion" and whatever
impressions are recorded in one's mind under that heading, concerns
only one's recollections; and just as generous wine gains in flavor by
passing the Equator, because of the evaporation of its watery particles,
likewise does recollection gain by getting rid of the watery particles
of memory; and yet recollection becomes as little a mere figment of the
imagination by this process as does the generous wine.

The participants were five in number: John, with the epithet of the
Seducer, Victor Eremita, Constantin Constantius, and yet two others
whose names I have not exactly forgotten--which would be a matter
of small importance--but whose names I did not learn. It was as
if these two had no proper names, for they were constantly addressed
by some epithet. The one was called the Young Person. Nor was he more
than twenty and some years, of slender and delicate build, and of a very
dark complexion. His face was thoughtful; but more pleasing even was
its lovable and engaging expression which betokened a purity of soul
harmonizing perfectly with the soft charm, almost feminine, and the
transparency of his whole presence. This external beauty of appearance
was lost sight of, however, in one's next impression of him; or, one
kept it only in mind whilst regarding a youth nurtured or--to use
a still tenderer expression--petted into being, by thought, and
nourished by the contents of his own soul--a youth who as yet
had had nothing to do with the world, had been neither aroused and
fired, nor disquieted and disturbed. Like a sleep-walker he bore the
law of his actions within himself, and the amiable, kindly expression
of his countenance concerned no one, but only mirrored the disposition
of his soul.

The other person they called the Dressmaker, and that was his
occupation. Of him it was impossible to get a consistent impression.
He was dressed according to the very latest fashion, with his hair
curled and perfumed, fragrant with eau-de-cologne. One moment his
carriage did not lack self-possession, whereas in the next it assumed a
certain dancing, festive air, a certain hovering motion, which, however,
was kept in rather definite bounds by the robustness of his figure. Even
when he was most malicious in his speech his voice ever had a touch of
the smoothtonguedness of the shop, the suaveness of the dealer in
fancy-goods, which evidently was utterly disgusting to himself and only
satisfied his spirit of defiance. As I think of him now I understand him
better, to be sure, than when I first saw him step out of his carriage
and I involuntarily laughed. At the same time there is some
contradiction left still. He had transformed or bewitched himself, had
by the magic of his own will assumed the appearance of one almost
half-witted, but had not thereby entirely satisfied himself; and this is
why his reflectiveness now and then peered forth from beneath his
disguise.

As I think of it now it seems rather absurd that five such persons
should get a banquet arranged. Nor would anything have come of it,
I suppose, if Constantin had not been one of us. In a retired room of
a confectioner's shop where they met at times, the matter had been
broached once before, but had been dropped immediately when the
question arose as to who was to head the undertaking. The Young
Person was declared unfit for that task, the Dressmaker affirmed
himself to be too busy. Victor Eremita did not beg to be excused
because "he had married a wife or bought a yoke of oxen which he
needed to prove";[1] but, he said, even if he should make an
exception, for once, and come to the banquet, yet he would decline
the courtesy offered him to preside at it, and he therewith "entered
protest at the proper time.[2]" This, John considered a work spoken
in due season; because, as he saw it, there was but one person able
to prepare a banquet, and that was the possessor of the wishing-table
which set itself with delectable things whenever he said to it
"Cover thyself!" He averred that to enjoy the charms of a young girl
in haste was not always the wisest course; but as to a banquet, he
would not wait for it, and generally was tired of it a long while
before it came off. However, if the plan was to be carried into effect
he would make one condition, which was, that the banquet should be so
arranged as to be served in one course. And that all were agreed on.
Also, that the settings for it were to be made altogether new, and
that afterwards they were to be destroyed entirely; ay, before rising
from table one was to hear the preparation for their destruction.
Nothing was to remain; "not even so much," said the Dressmaker, "as
there is left of a dress after it has been made over into a hat."
"Nothing," said John, "because nothing is more unpleasant than a
sentimental scene, and nothing more disgusting than the knowledge
that somewhere or other there is an external setting which in a
direct and impertinent fashion pretends to be a reality."

When the conversation had thus became animated, Victor Eremita
suddenly arose, struck an attitude on the floor, beckoned with his hand
in the fashion of one commanding and, holding his arm extended as one
lifting a goblet, he said, with the gesture of one waving a welcome:
"With this cup whose fragrance already intoxicates my senses, whose cool
fire already inflames my blood, I greet you, beloved fellow-banqueters,
and bid you welcome; being entirely assured  that each one of you is
sufficiently satisfied by our merely speaking about the banquet; for our
Lord satisfied the stomach before satisfying the eye, but the imagination
acts in the reverse fashion." Thereupon he inserted his hand in his
pocket, took from it a cigar-case, struck a match, and began to smoke.
When Constantin Constantius protested against this sovereign free way
of transforming the banquet planned into an illusory fragment of life,
Victor declared that he did not believe for one moment that such
a banquet could be got up and that, in any case, it had been
a mistake to let it become the subject of discussion in advance.
"Whatever is to be good must come at once; for 'at once' is the
divinest of all categories and deserves to be honored as in the language
of the Romans: _ex templo_,[3] because it is the starting point for
all that is divine in life, and so much so that what is not done at
once is of evil." However, he remarked, he did not care to argue
this point. In case the others wished to speak and act differently
he would not say a word, but if they wished him to explain the sense
of his remarks more fully he must have leave to make a speech,
because he did not consider it all desirable to provoke a discussion
on the subject.

Permission was given him; and as the others called on him to do so
at once, he spoke as follows: "A banquet is in itself a difficult
matter, because even if it be arranged with ever so much taste and
talent there is something else essential to its success, to wit, good
luck. And by this I mean not such matters as most likely would give
concern to an anxious hostess, but something different, a something
which no one can make absolutely sure of: a fortunate harmonizing
of the spirit and the minutiæ of the banquet, that fine ethereal
vibration of chords, that soul-stirring music which cannot be ordered
in advance from the town-musicians. Look you, therefore is it a
hazardous thing to undertake, because if things do go wrong, perhaps
from the very start, one may suffer such a depression and loss of
spirits that recovery from it might involve a very long time.

"Sheer habit and thoughtlessness are father and godfather to most
banquets, and it is only due to the lack of critical sense among people
that one fails to notice the utter absence of any idea in them. In the
first place, women ought never to be present at a banquet. Women
may be used to advantage only in the Greek style, as a chorus of
dancers. As it is the main thing at a banquet that there be eating and
drinking, woman ought not to be present; for she cannot do justice to
what is offered; or, if she can, it is most unbeautiful. Whenever a
woman is present the matter of eating and drinking ought to be reduced
to the very slightest proportions. At most, it ought to be no more
than some trifling feminine occupation, to have something to busy
one's hands with. Especially in the country a little repast of this
kind--which, by the way, should be put at other times than the
principal meals--may be extremely delightful; and if so, always
owing to the presence of the other sex. To do like the English, who
let the fair sex retire as soon as the real drinking is to start,
is to fall between two stools, for every plan ought to be a whole,
and the very manner with which I take a seat at the table and seize
hold of knife and fork bears a definite relation to this whole. In
the same sense a political banquet presents an unbeautiful
ambiguity inasmuch as one does not[4] want to cut down to a very
minimum the essentials of a banquet, and yet does not wish to have
the speeches thought of as having been made over the cups.

"So far, we are agreed, I suppose; and our number--in case anything
should come of the banquet--is correctly chosen, according to that
beautiful rule: neither more than the Muses nor fewer than the
Graces. Now I demand the greatest superabundance of everything
thinkable. That is, even though everything be not actually there, yet
the possibility of having it must be at one's immediate beck and call,
aye, hover temptingly over the table, more seductive even than the
actual sight of it. I beg to be excused, however, from banqueting on
sulphur-matches or on a piece of sugar which all are to suck in turn.
My demands for such a banquet will, on the contrary, be difficult to
satisfy; for the feast itself must be calculated to arouse and incite
that unmentionable longing which each worthy participant is to bring
with him. I require that the earth's fertility be at our service, as
though everything sprouted forth at the very moment the desire for it
was born. I desire a more luxurious abundance of wine than when
Mephistopheles needed but to drill holes into the table to obtain it.
I demand an illumination more splendid than have the gnomes when
they lift up the mountain on pillars and dance in a sea of blazing
light. I demand what most excites the senses, I demand their
gratification by deliciously sweet perfumes, more superb than any
in the Arabian Nights. I demand a coolness which voluptuously provokes
desire and breathes relaxation on desire satisfied. I demand a
fountain's unceasing  enlivenment. If Mæcenas could not sleep without
hearing the splashing of a fountain, I cannot eat without it. Do not
misunderstand me, I can eat stockfish without it, but I cannot eat at
a banquet without it; I can drink water without it, but I cannot drink
wine at a banquet without it. I demand a host of servants, chosen and
comely, as if I sate at table with the gods; I demand that there
shall be music at the feast, both strong and subdued; and I demand
that it shall be an accompaniment to my thoughts; and what concerns
you, my friends, my demands regarding you are altogether incredible.
Do you see, by reason of all these demands--which are as many
reasons against it--I hold a banquet to be a _pium desideratum_,[5]
and am so far from desiring a repetition of it that I presume it is not
feasible even a first time."


The only one who had not actually participated in this conversation,
nor in the frustration of the banquet, was Constantin. Without him,
nothing would have been done save the talking. He had come to a
different conclusion and was of the opinion that the idea might well
be realized, if one but carried the matter with a high hand.

Then some time passed, and both the banquet and the discussion
about it were forgotten, when suddenly, one day, the participants
received a card of invitation from Constantius  for a banquet the very
same evening. The motto of the party had been given by him as: _In Vino
Veritas_, because there was to be speaking, to be sure, and not only
conversation; but the speeches were not to be made except _in vino_,
and no truth was to be uttered there excepting that which is
_in vino_--when the wine is a defense of the truth and the truth a
defense of the wine.

The place had been chosen in the woods, some ten miles distant
from Copenhagen. The hall in which they were to feast had been newly
decorated and in every way made unrecognizable; a smaller room,
separated from the hall by a corridor, was arranged for an orchestra.
Shutters and curtains were let down before all windows, which were left
open. The arrangement that the participants were to drive to the
banquet in the evening hour was to intimate to them--and that was
Constantin's idea--what was to follow. Even if one knows that
one is driving to a banquet, and the imagination therefore indulges for
a moment in thoughts of luxury, yet the impression of the natural
surroundings is too powerful to be resisted. That this might possibly
not be the case was the only contingency he apprehended; for just as
there is no power like the imagination to render beautiful all it
touches, neither is there any power which can to such a degree disturb
all--misfortune conspiring--if confronted with reality. But
driving on a summer evening does not lure the imagination to luxurious
thoughts, but rather to the opposite. Even if one does not see it or
hear it, the imagination will unconsciously create a picture of the
longing for home which one is apt to feel in the evening hours--one
sees the reapers, man and maid, returning from their work in the fields,
one hears the hurried rattling of the hay wagon, one interprets even the
far-away lowing from the meadows as a longing. Thus does a summer
evening suggest idyllic thoughts, soothing even a restless mind with
its assuagement, inducing even the soaring imagination to abide on
earth with an indwelling yearning for home as the place from whence
it came, and thus teaching the insatiable mind to be satisfied with
little, by rendering one content; for in the evening hour time stands
still and eternity lingers.

Thus they arrived in the evening hour: those invited; for Constantin
had come out somewhat earlier. Victor Eremita who resided in the country
not far away came on horseback, the others in a carriage. And just as
they had discharged it, a light open vehicle rolled in through the
gate carrying a merry company of four journeymen who were entertained
to be ready at the decisive moment to function as a corps of destruction:
just as firemen are stationed in a theatre, for the opposite reason
at once to extinguish a fire.


So long as one is a child one possesses sufficient imagination
to maintain one's soul at the very top-notch of expectation--for
a whole hour in the dark room, if need be; but when one has grown
older one's imagination may easily cause one to tire of the Christmas
tree before seeing it.


The folding doors were opened. The effect of the radiant illumination,
the coolness wafting toward them, the beguiling fragrance of sweet
perfumes, the excellent taste of the arrangements, for a moment
overwhelmed the feelings of those entering; and when, at the same
time, strains from the ballet of "Don Juan" sounded from the orchestra,
their persons seemed transfigured and, as if out of reverence for an
unseen spirit about them, they stopped short for a moment like men
who have been roused by admiration and who have risen to admire.


Whoever knows that happy moment, whoever has appreciated its
delight, and has not also felt the apprehension lest suddenly something
might happen, some trifle perhaps, which yet might be sufficient to
disturb all! Whoever has held the lamp of Aladdin in his hand and has
not also felt the swooning of pleasure, because one needs but to wish?
Whoever has held what is inviting in his hand and has not also learned
to keep his wrist limber to let go at once, if need be?

Thus they stood side by side. Only Victor stood alone, absorbed in
thought; a shudder seemed to pass through his soul, he almost trembled;
he collected himself and saluted the omen with these words: "Ye
mysterious, festive, and seductive strains which drew me out of the
cloistered seclusion of a quiet youth and beguiled me with a longing as
mighty as a recollection, and terrible, as though Elvira had
not even been seduced but had only desired to be! Immortal Mozart,
thou to whom I owe all; but no! as yet I do not owe thee all. But when
I shall have become an old man--if ever I do become an old man;
or when I shall have become ten years older--if ever I do; or when
I am become old--if ever I shall become old; or when I shall
die--for that, indeed, I know I shall: then shall I say: immortal
Mozart, thou to whom I owe all--and then I shall let my admiration,
which is my soul's first and only admiration, burst forth in all its
might and let it make away with me, as it often has been on the point
of doing. Then have I set my house in order,[6] then have I remembered
my beloved one, then have I confessed my love, then have I fully
established that I owe thee all, then am I occupied no longer with
thee, with the world, but only with the grave thought of death."

Now there came from the orchestra that invitation in which joy
triumphs most exultantly, and heaven-storming soars aloft above
Elvira's sorrowful thanks; and gracefully apostrophizing, John repeated:
"_Viva la liberta_"--"_et veritas_," said the Young Person; "but
above all, _in vino_," Constantin interrupted them, seating himself
at the table and inviting the others to do likewise.

How easy to prepare a banquet; yet Constantin declared that he
never would risk preparing another. How easy to admire; yet Victor
declared that he never again would lend words to his admiration; for to
suffer a discomfiture is more dreadful than to become an invalid in
war! How easy to express a desire, if one has the magic lamp; yet that
is at times more terrible than to perish of want!

They were seated. In the same moment the little company were
launched into the very middle of the infinite sea of enjoyment--as
if with one single bound. Each one had addressed all his thoughts and
all his desires to the banquet, had prepared his soul for the enjoyment
which was offered to overflowing and in which their souls overflowed.
The experienced driver is known by his ability to start the
snorting team with a single bound and to hold them well abreast; the
well-trained steed is known by his lifting himself in one absolutely
decisive leap: even if one or the other of the guests perhaps fell short
in some particular, certainly Constantin was a good host.

Thus they banqueted. Soon, conversation had woven its beautiful
wreaths about the banqueters, so that they sat garlanded. Now, it was
enamored of the food, now of the wine, and now again of itself; now,
it seemed to develop into significance, and then again it was altogether
slight. Soon, fancy unfolded itself--the splendid one which blows
but once, the tender one which straightway closes its petals; now, there
came an exclamation from one of the banqueters: "These truffles are
superb," and now, an order of the host: "This Chateau Margaux!" Now,
the music was drowned in the noise, now it was heard again. Sometimes
the servants stood still as if _in pausa_, in that decisive moment
when a new dish was being brought out, or a new wine was ordered and
mentioned by name, sometimes they were all a bustle. Sometimes there
was a silence for a moment, and then the re-animating spirit of the
music went forth over the guests. Now, one with some bold thought would
take the lead in the conversation and the others followed after, almost
forgetting to eat, and the music would sound after them as it sounds
after the jubilant shouts of a host storming on; now, only the clinking
of glasses and the clattering of plates was heard and the feasting
proceeded in silence, accompanied only by the music that joyously
advanced and again stimulated conversation. Thus they banqueted.


How poor is language in comparison with that symphony of sounds
unmeaning, yet how significant, whether of a battle or of a banquet,
which even scenic representation cannot imitate and for which language
has but a few words! How rich is language in the expression of the
world of ideas, and how poor, when it is to describe reality!

Only once did Constantin abandon his omnipresence in which one
actually lost sight of his presence. At the very beginning he got them
to sing one of the old drinking songs, "by way of calling to mind that
jolly time when men and women feasted together," as he said--a
proposal which had the positively burlesque effect he had perhaps
calculated it should have. It almost gained the upper hand when the
Dressmaker wanted them to sing the ditty: "When I shall mount the
bridal bed, hoiho!" After a couple of courses had been served Constantin
proposed that the banquet should conclude with each one's making a
speech, but that precautions should be taken against the speakers'
divagating too much. He was for making two conditions, viz., there
were to be no speeches until after the meal; and no one was to speak
before having drunk sufficiently to feel the power of the wine--else
he was to be in that condition in which one says much which under
other circumstances one would leave unsaid--without necessarily
having the connection of speech and thought constantly interrupted by
hiccoughs.[7] Before speaking, then, each one was to declare
solemnly that he was in that condition. No definite quantity of wine
was to be required, capacities differed so widely. Against this
proposal, John entered protest. He could never become intoxicated,
he averred, and when he had come to a certain point he grew the
soberer the more he drank. Victor Eremita was of the opinion that
any such preparatory premeditations to insure one's becoming drunk
would precisely militate against one's becoming so. If one desired
to become intoxicated the deliberate wish was only a hindrance. Then
there ensued some discussion about the divers influences of wine on
consciousness, and especially about the fact that, in the case of
a reflective temperament, an excess of wine may manifest itself,
not in any particular _impetus_ but, on the contrary, in a noticeably
cool self-possession. As to the contents of the speeches, Constantin
proposed that they should deal with love, that is, the relation
between man and woman. No love stories were to be told though they
might furnish the text of one's remarks.

The conditions were accepted. All reasonable and just demands a
host may make on his guests were fulfilled: they ate and drank, and
"drank and were filled with drink," as the Bible has it;[8] that is,
they drank stoutly.

The desert was served. Even if Victor had not, as yet, had his desire
gratified to hear the splashing of a fountain--which, for that
matter, he had luckily forgotten since that former conversation--now
champagne flowed profusely. The clock struck twelve. Thereupon
Constantin commanded silence, saluted the Young Person with a goblet
and the words _quod felix sit faustumque_[9] and bade him to speak
first.




(The Young Person's Speech)


The Young Person arose and declared that he felt the power of the
wine, which was indeed apparent to some degree; for the blood pulsed
strongly in his temples, and his appearance was not as beautiful as
before the meal. He spoke as follows:

If there be truth in the words of the poets, dear fellow-banqueters,
then unrequited love is, indeed, the greatest of sorrows. Should you
require any proof of this you need but listen to the speech of lovers.
They say that it is death, certain death; and the first time they
believe it--for the space of two weeks. The next time they say
that it is death; and finally they will die sometime--as the result
of unrequited love. For that love has killed them, about that there
can obtain no doubt. And as to love's having to take hold three times
to make away with them, that is not different from the dentist's having
to pull three times before he is able to budge that firmly rooted molar.
But, if unrequited love thus means certain death, how happy am I who
have never loved and, I hope, will only achieve dying some time,
and not from unrequited love! But just this may be the greatest
misfortune, for all I know, and how unfortunate must I then be!

The essence of love probably (for I speak as does a blind man about
colors), probably lies in its bliss; which is, in other words, that the
cessation of love brings death to the lover. This I comprehend very well
as in the nature of a hypothesis correlating life and death. But, if
love is to be merely by way of hypothesis, why, then lovers lay
themselves open to ridicule through their actually falling in love.
If, however, love is something real, why, then reality must bear out
what lovers say about it. But did one in real life ever hear of, or
observe, such things having taken place, even if there is hearsay to
that effect? Here I perceive already one of the contradictions in which
love involves a person; for whether this is different for those
initiated, that I have no means of knowing; but love certainly does
seem to involve people in the most curious contradictions.

There is no other relation between human beings which makes
such demands on one's ideality as does love, and yet love is never seen
to have it. For this reason alone I would be afraid of love; for I fear
that it might have the power to make me too talk vaguely about a bliss
which I did not feel and a sorrow I did not have. I say this here since
I am bidden to speak on love, though unacquainted with it--I
say this in surroundings which appeal to me like a Greek symposion; for
I should otherwise not care to speak on this subject as I do not wish to
disturb any one's happiness but, rather, am content with my own
thoughts. Who knows but these thoughts are sheer imbecilities and vain
imaginings--perhaps my ignorance is explicable from the fact
that I never have learned, nor have wished to learn, from any one, how
one comes to love; or from the fact that I have never yet challenged a
woman with a glance--which is supposed to be smart--but have always
lowered my eyes, unwilling to yield to an impression before having
fully made sure about the nature of the power into whose sphere
I am venturing.

At this point he was interrupted by Constantin who expostulated
with him because, by his very confession of never having been in love,
he had debarred himself from speaking. The Young Person declared that
at any other time he would gladly obey an injunction to that effect as
he had often enough experienced how tiresome it was to have to make a
speech; but that in this case he would insist upon his right. Precisely
the fact that one had had no love affair, he said, also constituted an
affair of love; and he who could assert this of himself was entitled to
speak about Eros just because his thoughts were bound to take issue
with the whole sex and not with individuals. He was granted permission
to speak and continued.


Inasmuch as my right to speak has been challenged, this may serve
to exempt me from your laughter; for I know well that, just as among
rustics he is not considered a man who does not call a tobacco pipe his
own, likewise among men-folks he is not considered a real man who is
not experienced in love. If any one feels like laughing, let him
laugh--my thought is, and remains, the essential consideration
for me. Or is love, perchance, privileged to be the only event which is
to be considered after, rather than before, it happens? If that be the
case, what then if I, having fallen in love, should later on think that
it was too late to think about it? Look you, this is the reason why I
choose to think about love before it happens. To be sure, lovers also
maintain that they gave the matter thought, but such is not the case.
They assume it to be essential in man to fall in love; but this surely
does not mean thinking about love but, rather, assuming it, in order
to make sure of getting one's self a sweetheart.

In fact, whenever my reflection endeavors to pin down love, naught
but contradiction seems to remain. At times, it is true, I feel as if
something had escaped me, but I cannot tell what it is, whereas my
reflection is able at once to point out the contradictions in what
does occur. Very well, then, in my opinion love is the greatest
self-contradiction imaginable, and comical at the same time. Indeed,
the one corresponds to the other. The comical is always seen to occur
in the category of contradictions--which truth I cannot take the
time to demonstrate now; but what I shall demonstrate now is that
love is comical. By love I mean the relation between man and woman.
I am not thinking of Eros in the Greek sense which has been extolled so
beautifully by Plato who, by the way, is so far from considering the
love of woman that he mentions it only in passing, holding it to be
inferior to the love of youths.[10] I say, love is comical to a
third person--more I say not. Whether it is for this reason that lovers
always hate a third person I do not know; but I do know that
reflection is always in such a relation the third person, and
for this reason I cannot love without at the same time having a third
person present in the shape of my reflection.

This surely cannot seem strange to any one, every one having
doubted everything, whereas I am uttering my doubts only with reference
to love. And yet I do think it strange that people have doubted
everything and have again reached certainty, without as much as dropping
a word concerning the difficulties which have held my thought
captive--so much so that I have, now and then, longed to be freed
of them--freed by the aid of one, note well, who was aware
of these difficulties, and not of one who in his sleep had a
notion to doubt, and to have doubted, everything, and again
in his sleep had the notion that he is explaining, and has
explained, all.[11]

Let me then have your attention, dear fellow banqueters, and if you
yourselves be lovers do not therefore interrupt me, nor try to silence
me because you do not wish to hear the explanation. Rather turn away
and listen with averted faces to what I have to say, and what I insist
upon saying, having once begun.

In the first place I consider it comical that every one loves, and
every one wishes to love, without any one ever being able to tell one
what is the nature of the lovable or that which is the real object of
love. As to the word "to love" I shall not discuss it since it means
nothing definite; but as soon as the matter is broached at all we are
met by the question as to what it is one loves. No other answer is
ever vouchsafed us on that point other than that one loves what is
lovable. For if one should make answer, with Plato,[12] that one is
to love what is good, one has in taking this single step exceeded
the bounds of the erotic.

The answer may be offered, perhaps, that one is to love what is
beautiful. But if I then should ask whether to love means to love a
beautiful landscape or a beautiful painting it would be immediately
perceived that the erotic is not, as it were, comprised in the more
general term of the love of things beautiful, but is something entirely
of its own kind. Were a lover--just to give an example--to speak
as follows, in order to express adequately how much love there
dwelled in him: "I love beautiful landscapes, and my Lalage, and the
beautiful dancer, and a beautiful horse--in short, I love all that
is beautiful," his Lalage would not be satisfied with his encomium,
however well satisfied she might be with him in all other respects, and
even if she be beautiful; and now suppose Lalage is not beautiful and he
yet loved her!

Again, if I should refer the erotic element to the bisection
of which Aristophanes tells us[13] when he says that the gods severed
man into two parts as one cuts flounders, and that these parts thus
separated sought one another, then I again encounter a difficulty I
cannot get over, which is, in how far I may base my reasoning on
Aristophanes who in his speech--just because there is no reason for
the thought to stop at this point--goes further in his thought and
thinks that the gods might take it into their heads to divide man
into three parts, for the sake of still better fun. For the sake
of still better fun; for is it not true, as I said, that love
renders a person ridiculous, if not in the eyes of others then
certainly in the eyes of the gods?

Now, let me assume that the erotic element resides essentially in the
relation between man and woman--what is to be inferred from that?
If the lover should say to his Lalage: I love you because you are a
woman; I might as well love any other woman, as for instance, ugly
Zoë: then beautiful Lalage would feel insulted.

In what, then, consists the lovable? This is my question; but
unfortunately, no one has been able to tell me. The individual lover
always believes that, as far as he is concerned, he knows. Still he
cannot make himself understood by any other lover; and he who listens
to the speech of a number of lovers will learn that no two of them ever
agree, even though they all talk about the same thing. Disregarding
those altogether silly explanations which leave one as wise as before,
that is, end by asserting that it is really the pretty feet of the
beloved damsel, or the admired mustachios of the swain, which are the
objects of love--disregarding these, one will find mentioned, even
in the declamations of lovers in the higher style, first a number of
details and, finally, the declaration: all her lovable ways; and when
they have reached the climax: that inexplicable something I do not know
how to explain. And this speech is meant to please especially beautiful
Lalage. Me it does not please, for I don't understand a word of it and
find, rather, that it contains a double contradiction--first, that
it ends with the inexplicable, second, that it ends with the
inexplicable; for he who intends to end with the inexplicable had best
begin with the inexplicable and then say no more, lest he lay himself
open to suspicion. If he begin with the inexplicable, saying no more,
then this does not prove his helplessness, for it is, anyway, an
explanation in a negative sense; but if he does begin with something
else and lands in the inexplicable, then this does certainly
prove his helplessness.

So then we see: to love corresponds to the lovable; and the lovable
is the inexplicable. Well, that is at least something; but comprehensible
it is not, as little as the inexplicable way in which love seizes
on its prey. Who, indeed, would not be alarmed if people about one,
time and again, dropped down dead, all of a sudden, or had convulsions,
without any one being able to account for it? But precisely in this
fashion does love invade life, only with the difference that one is
not alarmed thereby, since the lovers themselves regard it as their
greatest happiness, but that one, on the contrary, is tempted to
laugh; for the comical and the tragical elements ever correspond to
one another. Today, one may converse with a person and can fairly
well make him out--tomorrow, he speaks in tongues and with strange
gestures: he is in love.

Now, if to love meant to fall in love with the first person that came
along, it would be easy to understand that one could give no special
reasons for it; but since to love means to fall in love with one, one
single person in all the world, it would seem as if such an extraordinary
process of singling out ought to be due to such an extensive chain of
reasoning that one might have to beg to be excused from hearing
it--not so much because it did not explain anything as because it
might be too lengthy to listen to. But no, the lovers are not able to
explain anything at all. He has seen hundreds upon hundreds of
women; he is, perhaps, advanced in years and has all along felt
nothing--and all at once he sees her, her the Only one, Catherine.
Is this not comical? Is it not comical that the relation which is
to explain and beautify all life, love, is not like the mustard
seed from which there grows a great tree,[14] but being still smaller
is, at bottom, nothing at all; for not a single antecedent criterion
can be mentioned, as e.g., that the phenomenon occurred at a certain
age, nor a single reason as to why he should select her, her alone
in all the world--and that by no means in the same sense as when
"Adam chose Eve, because there was none other.[15]"

Or is not the explanation which the lovers vouchsafe just as comical;
or, does it not, rather, emphasize the comical aspect of love? They say
that love renders one blind, and by this fact they undertake to explain
the phenomenon. Now, if a person who was going into a dark room to
fetch something should answer, on my advising him to take a light
along, that it was only a trifling matter he wanted and so he would
not bother to take a light along--ah! then I would understand him
excellently well. If, on the other hand, this same person should take
me aside and, with an air of mystery, confide to me that the thing
he was about to fetch was of the very greatest importance and that
it was for this reason that he was able to do it in the dark--ah!
then I wonder if my weak mortal brain could follow the soaring flight
of his speech. Even if I should refrain from laughing, in order not
to offend him, I should hardly be able to restrain my mirth as soon
as he had turned his back. But at love nobody laughs; for I am quite
prepared to be embarrassed like the Jew who, after ending his story,
asks: Is there no one who will laugh?[16] And yet I did not miss
the point, as did the Jew, and as to my laughter I am far from wanting
to insult any one. Quite on the contrary, I scorn those fools who
imagine that their love has such good reasons that they can afford
to laugh at other lovers; for since love is altogether inexplicable,
one lover is as ridiculous as the other. Quite as foolish and haughty
I consider it also when a man proudly looks about him in the circle
of girls to find who may be worthy of him, or when a girl proudly
tosses her head to select or reject; because such persons are simply
basing their thoughts on an unexplained assumption. No. What busies
my thought is love as such, and it is love which seems ridiculous
to me; and therefore I fear it, lest I become ridiculous in my own eyes,
or ridiculous in the eyes of the gods who have fashioned man thus.
In other words, if love is ridiculous it is equally ridiculous, whether
now my sweetheart be a princess or a servant girl; for the lovable, as
we have seen, is the inexplicable.

Look you, therefore do I fear love, and find precisely in
this a new proof of love's being comical; for my fear is so
curiously tragic that it throws light on the comical nature of love.
When people wreck a building a sign is hung up to warn people, and I
shall take care to stand from under; when a bar has been freshly painted
a stone is laid in the road to apprise people of the fact; when a driver
is in danger of running a man over he will shout "look out"; when
there have been cases of cholera in a house a soldier is set as
guard; and so forth. What I mean is that if there is some danger, one
may be warned and will successfully escape it by heeding the warning.
Now, fearing to be rendered ridiculous by love, I certainly regard it as
dangerous; so what shall I do to escape it? In other words, what shall
I do to escape the danger of some woman falling in love with me?
I am far from entertaining the thought of being an Adonis every
girl is bound to fall in love with (_relata refero_,[17] for what
this means I do not understand)--goodness no! But since I do not
know what the lovable is I cannot, by any manners of means, know how
to escape this danger. Since, for that matter, the very opposite of
beauty may constitute the lovable; and, finally, since the inexplicable
also is the lovable, I am forsooth in the same situation as the man
Jean Paul speaks of somewhere who, standing on one foot, reads a
sign saying, "fox-traps here," and now does not dare, either to lift
his foot or to set it down.

No, love any one I will not, before I have fathomed what love is;
but this I cannot, but have, rather, come to the conclusion that it is
comical. Hence I will not love--but alas! I have not thereby
avoided the danger, for, since I do not know what the lovable is and
how it seizes me, or how it seizes a woman with reference to me, I
cannot make sure whether I have avoided the danger. This is tragical
and, in a certain sense, even profoundly tragical, even if no one is
concerned about it, or if no one is concerned about the bitter
contradiction for one who thinks--that a something exists which
everywhere exercises its power and yet is not to be definitely
conceived by thought and which, perhaps, may attack from the
rear him who in vain seeks to conceive it. But as to the tragic
side of the matter it has its deep reason in the comic aspects
just pointed out. Possibly, every other person will turn all this
upside down and not find that to be comical which I do, but
rather that which I conceive to be tragical; but this too proves that
I am right to a certain extent. And that for which, if so happens, I
become either a tragic or comic victim is plain enough, viz., my
desire to reflect about all I do, and not imagine I am reflecting
about life by dismissing its every important circumstance with an
"I don't care, either way."

Man has both a soul and a body. About this the wisest and best of
the race are agreed. Now, in case one assumes the essence of love to lie
in the relation between man and woman, the comic aspect will show again
in the face-about which is seen when the highest spiritual values
express themselves in the most sensual terms. I am now referring
to all those extraordinary and mystic signals of love--in short, to
all the free-masonry which forms a continuation of the above-mentioned
inexplicable something. The contradiction in which love here involves a
person lies in the fact that the symbolic signs mean nothing at all
or--which amounts to the same--that no one is able to explain what
they do signify. Two loving souls vow that they will love each the
other in all eternity; thereupon they embrace, and with a kiss
they seal this eternal pact. Now I ask any thinking person whether he
would have hit upon that! And thus there is constant shifting from the
one to the other extreme in love. The most spiritual is expressed
by its very opposite, and the sensual is to signify the most
spiritual.--Let me assume I am in love. In that case I would
conceive it to be of the utmost importance to me that the one I love
belonged to me for all time. This I comprehend; for I am now, really,
speaking only of Greek eroticism which has to do with loving beautiful
souls. Now when the person I love had vowed to return my love I would
believe her or, in as far as there remained any doubt in me, try to
combat my doubt. But what happens actually? For if I were in love
I would, probably, behave like all the others, that is, seek
to obtain still some other assurance than merely to believe
her I love; which, though, is plainly the only assurance to be had.

When Cockatoo[18] all at once begins to plume himself like a
duck which is gorged with food, and then emits the word "Marian,"
everybody will laugh, and so will I. I suppose the spectator finds it
comical that Cockatoo, who doesn't love Marian at all, should be on
such intimate terms with her. But suppose, now, that Cockatoo does
love Marian. Would that be comical still? To me it would; and the
comical would seem to me to lie in love's having become capable of
being expressed in such fashion. Whether now this has been the custom
since the beginning of the world makes no difference whatsoever, for the
comical has the prescriptive  right from all eternity to be present in
contradictions--and here is a contradiction. There is really
nothing comical in the antics of a manikin since we see some one pulling
the strings. But to be a manikin at the beck of something inexplicable
is indeed comical, for the contradiction lies in our not seeing any
sensible reason why one should have to twitch now this leg and now
that. Hence, if I cannot explain what I am doing, I do not care to do
it; and if I cannot understand the power into whose sphere I am
venturing, I do not care to surrender myself to that power. And if love
is so mysterious a law which binds together the extremest contradictions,
then who will guarantee that I might not, one day, become altogether
confused? Still, that does not concern me so much.

Again, I have heard that some lovers consider the behavior of other
lovers ridiculous. I cannot conceive how this ridicule is justified,
for if this law of love be a natural law, then all lovers are subject
to it; but if it be the law of their own choice, then those laughing
lovers ought to be able to explain all about love; which, however, they
are unable to do. But in this respect I understand this matter better as
it seems a convention for one lover to laugh at the other because
he always finds the other lover ridiculous, but not himself. If it
be ridiculous to kiss an ugly girl, it is also ridiculous to kiss
a pretty one; and the notion that doing this in some particular way
should entitle one to cast ridicule on another who does it differently,
is but presumptuousness and a conspiracy which does not, for all that,
exempt such a snob from laying himself open to the ridicule which
invariably results from the fact that no one is able to explain what
this act of kissing signifies, whereas it is to signify all--to
signify, indeed, that the lovers desire to belong to each other
in all eternity; aye, what is still more amusing, to render them
certain that they will. Now, if a man should suddenly lay his head on
one side, or shake it, or kick out with his leg and, upon my asking
him why he did this, should answer "To be sure I don't know, myself,
I just happened to do so, next time I may do something different, for I
did it unconsciously"--ah, then I would understand him quite
well. But if he said, as the lovers say about their antics, that all
bliss lay therein, how could I help finding it ridiculous--just
as I thought that other man's motions ridiculous, to be sure in a
different sense, until he restrained my laughter by declaring that
they did not signify anything. For by doing so he removed the
contradiction which is the basic cause of the comical. It is not at all
comical that the insignificant is declared to signify nothing, but it
is very much so if it be asserted to signify all.

As regards involuntary actions, the contradiction arises at the very
outset because involuntary actions are not looked for in a free rational
being. Thus if one supposed that the Pope had a coughing spell the
very moment he was to place the crown on Napoleon's head; or that
bride and groom in the most solemn moment of the wedding ceremony
should fall to sneezing--these would be examples of the comical.
That is, the more a given action accentuates the free rational being,
the more comical are involuntary actions. This holds true also in
respect of the erotic gesticulations, where the comical element appears
a second time, owing to the circumstance that the lovers attempt to
explain away the contradiction by attributing to their gesticulations an
absolute value. As is well known, children have a keen sense
of the ridiculous--witness children's testimony which can always
be relied on in this regard. Now as a rule children will laugh at
lovers, and if one makes them tell what they have seen, surely no one
can help laughing. This is, perhaps, due to the fact that children omit
the point. Very strange! When the Jew omitted the point no one cared to
laugh. Here, on the contrary, every one laughs because the point is
omitted; since, however, no one can explain what the point is--why,
then there is no point at all.

So the lovers explain nothing; and those who praise love explain
nothing but are merely intent on--as one is bidden in the Royal
Laws of Denmark--on saying anent it all which may be pleasant
and of good report. But a man who thinks, desires to have his logical
categories in good order; and he who thinks about love wishes to be
sure about his categories also in this matter. The fact is, though, that
people do not think about love, and a "pastoral science" is still
lacking; for even if a poet in a pastoral poem makes an attempt to
show how love is born, everything is smuggled in again by help of
another person who teaches the lovers how to love!

As we saw, the comical element in love arose from the face-about
whereby the highest quality of one sphere does not find expression in
that sphere but in the exactly opposite quality of another sphere. It is
comical that the soaring flight of love--the desire to belong to
each other for all time--lands ever, like Saft,[19] in the pantry;
but still more comical is it that this conclusion is said to
constitute love's highest expression.

Wherever there is a contradiction, there the comical element is
present also. I am ever following that track. If it be disconcerting to
you, dear fellow banqueters, to follow me in what I shall have to say
now, then follow me with averted countenances. I myself am speaking
as if with veiled eyes; for as I see only the mystery in these matters,
why, I cannot see, or I see nothing.

What is a consequence? If it cannot, in some way or other, be brought
under the same head as its antecedent--why, then it would be ridiculous
if it posed as a consequence. To illustrate: if a man who wanted to
take a bath jumped into the tank and, coming to the surface again
somewhat confused, groped for the rope to hold on to, but caught the
douche-line by mistake, and a shower now descended on him with
sufficient motivation and for excellent good reason--why, then the
consequence would be entirely in order. The ridiculous here consisted
in his seizing the wrong rope; but there is nothing ridiculous in
the shower descending when one pulls the proper rope. Rather, it would
be ridiculous if it did not come; as for example, just to show the
correctness of my contention about contradictions, if a man nerved
himself with bold resolution in order to withstand the shock and, in
the enthusiasm of his decision, with a stout heart pulled the
line--and the shower did not come.

Let us see now how it is with regard to love. The lovers wish to
belong to each other for all time, and this they express, curiously, by
embracing each other with all the intensity of the moment; and all the
bliss of love is said to reside therein. But all desire is egotistic.
Now, to be sure, the lover's desire is not egotistic in respect of
the one he loves, but the desire of both in conjunction is absolutely
egotistic in so far as they in their union and love represent a new ego.
And yet they are deceived; for in the same moment the race triumphs
over the individual, the race is victorious, and the individuals are
debased to do its bidding.

Now this I find more ridiculous than what Aristophanes thought so
ridiculous. The ridiculous aspect of his theory of bi-section lies in
the inherent contradiction (which the ancient author does not
sufficiently emphasize, however). In considering a person one naturally
supposes him to be an entity, and so one does believe till it becomes
apparent that, under the obsession of love, he is but a half which runs
about looking for its complement. There is nothing ridiculous in half
an apple. The comical would appear if a whole apple turned out to be
only half an apple. In the first case there exists no contradiction,
but certainly in the latter. If one actually based one's reasoning
on the figure of speech that woman is but half a person she would
not be ridiculous at all in her love. Man, however, who has been
enjoying civic rights as a whole person, will certainly appear
ridiculous when he takes to running about (and looking for his
other half);[20] for he betrays thereby that he is but half a
person. In fact, the more one thinks about the matter the more
ridiculous it seems; because if man really be a whole, why, then
he will not become a whole in love, but he and woman would make
up one and a half. No wonder, then, that the gods laugh, and
particularly at man.

But let me return to my consequence. When the lovers have found each
other, one should certainly believe that they formed a whole, and in
this should lie the proof of their assertion that they wished to live
for each other for all time. But lo! instead of living for each other
they begin to live for the race, and this they do not even suspect.

What is a consequence? If, as I observed, one cannot detect in it
the cause out of which it proceeded, the consequence is merely
ridiculous, and he becomes a laughing stock to whom this happens.
Now, the fact that the separated halves have found each other ought
to be a complete satisfaction and rest for them; and yet the consequence
is a new existence. That having found each other should mean a new
existence for the lovers, is comprehensible enough; but not, that a new
existence for a third being should take its inception from this fact.
And yet the resulting consequence is greater than that of which it is
the consequence, whereas such an end as the lovers' finding each other
ought to be infallible evidence of no other, subsequent, consequence
being thinkable.

Does the satisfaction of any other desire show an analogy to this
consequence? Quite on the contrary, the satisfaction of desire is in
every other case evinced by a period of rest; and even if a
_tristitia_[21] does supervene--indicating, by the way, that every
satisfaction of an appetite is comical--this _tristitia_ is a
straightforward consequence, though no _tristitia_ so eloquently
attests a preceding comical element as does that following love.
It is quite another matter with an enormous consequence such as
we are dealing with, a consequence of which no one knows whence
it comes, nor whether it will come; whereas, if it does come, it
comes as a consequence.

Who is able to grasp this? And yet that which for the initiates of
love constitutes the greatest pleasure is also the most important thing
for them--so important that they even adopt new names, derived
from the consequence thereof which thus, curiously enough, assumes
retroactive force. The lover is now called father, his sweetheart,
mother; and these names seem to them the most beautiful. And yet there
is a being to whom these names are even more beautiful; for what is as
beautiful as filial piety? To me it seems the most beautiful of all
sentiments; and fortunately I can appreciate the thought underlying it.
We are taught that it is seeming in a son to love his father. This I
comprehend, I cannot even suspect that there is any contradiction
possible here, and I acknowledge infinite satisfaction in being held
by the loving bonds of filial piety. I believe it is the greatest debt
of all to owe another being one's life. I believe that this debt cannot
ever be wiped out, or even fathomed by any calculation, and for this
reason I agree with Cicero when he asserts that the son is always in the
wrong as against his father; and it is precisely filial piety which
teaches me to believe this, teaches me not even to penetrate the hidden,
but rather to remain hidden in the father. Quite true, I am glad to be
another person's greatest debtor; but as to the opposite, viz., before
deciding to make another person my greatest debtor, I want to arrive
at greater clarity. For to my conception there is a world of difference
between being some person's debtor, and making some person one's
debtor to such an extent that he will never be able to clear himself.

What filial piety forbids the son to consider, love bids the father
to consider. And here contradiction sets in again. If the son has an
immortal soul like his father, what does it mean, then, to be a father?
For must I not smile at myself when thinking of myself as a
father--whereas the son is most deeply moved when he reflects on
the relation he bears to his father? Very well do I understand Plato
when he says that an animal will give birth to an animal of the same
species, a plant, to a plant of the same species, and thus also man
to man.[22] But this explains nothing, does not satisfy one's thought,
and arouses but a dim feeling; for an immortal soul cannot be born.
Whenever, then, a father considers his son in the light of his son's
immortality--which is, indeed, the essential consideration[23]--he
will probably smile at himself, for he cannot, by any means, grasp in
their entirety all the beautiful and noble thoughts which his son with
filial piety entertains about him. If, on the other hand, he considers
his son from the point of view of his animal nature he must smile again,
because the conception of fatherhood is too exalted an expression
for it.

Finally, if it were thinkable that a father influenced his son in
such fashion that his own nature was a condition from which the
son's nature could not free itself, then the contradiction would arise
in another direction; for in this case nothing more terrible is
thinkable than being a father. There is no comparison between killing
a person and giving him life--the former decides his fate only in
time, the other for all eternity. So there is a contradiction again, and
one both to laugh and to weep about. Is paternity then an
illusion--even if not in the same sense as is implied in Magdelone's
speech to Jeronymus[24]--or is it the most terrible thought imaginable?
Is it the greatest benefit conferred on one, or is it the sweetest
gratification of one's desire--is it something which just happens,
or is it the greatest task of life?

Look you, for this reason have I forsworn all love, for my thought
is to me the most essential consideration. So even if love be the most
exquisite joy, I renounce it, without wishing either to offend or to
envy any one; and even if love be the condition for conferring the
greatest benefit imaginable I deny myself the opportunity therefor--but
my thought I have not prostituted. By no means do I lack an eye for
what is beautiful, by no means does my heart remain unmoved when I
read the songs of the poets, by no means is my soul without sadness
when it yields to the beautiful conception of love; but I do not wish
to become unfaithful to my thought. And of what avail were it to be,
for there is no happiness possible for me except my thought have
free sway. If it had not, I would in desperation yearn for my
thought, which I may not desert to cleave to a wife, for it is my
immortal part and, hence, of more importance than a wife. Well do I
comprehend that if any thing is sacred it is love; that if faithlessness
in any relation is base, it is doubly so in love; that if any deceit
is detestable, it is tenfold more detestable in love. But my soul is
innocent of blame. I have never looked at any woman to desire her,
neither have I fluttered about aimlessly before blindly plunging, or
lapsing, into the most decisive of all relations. If I knew what the
lovable were I would know with certainty whether I had offended by
tempting any one; but since I do not know, I am certain only of
never having had the conscious desire to do so.

Supposing I should yield to love and be made to laugh; or supposing
I should be cast down by terror, since I cannot find the narrow path
which lovers travel as easily as if it were the broad highway,
undisturbed by any doubts, which they surely have bestowed thought on
(seeing our times have, indeed, reflected about all[25] and consequently
will comprehend me when I assert that to act unreflectingly is nonsense,
as one ought to have gone through all possible reflections before
acting)--supposing, I say, I should yield to love! Would I not
insult past redress my beloved one if I laughed; or irrevocably plunge
her into despair if I were overwhelmed by terror? For I understand
well enough that a woman cannot be expected to have thought as
profoundly about these matters; and a woman who found love comical
(as but gods and men can, for which reason woman is a temptation
luring them to become ridiculous) would both betray a suspicious
amount of previous experience and understand me least. But a woman
who comprehended the terror of love would have lost her loveliness
and still fail to understand me--she would be annihilated; which
is in nowise my case, so long as my thought saves me.

Is there no one ready to laugh? When I began by wanting to speak
about the comical element in love you perhaps expected to be made to
laugh, for it is easy to make you laugh, and I myself am a friend of
laughter; and still you did not laugh, I believe. The effect of my
speech was a different one, and yet precisely this proves that I have
spoken about the comical. If there be no one who laughs at my
speech--well, then laugh a little at me, dear fellow-banqueters,
and I shall not wonder; for I do not understand what I have occasionally
heard you say about love. Very probably, though, you are among the
initiated as I am not.


Thereupon the Young Person seated himself. He had become more
beautiful, almost, than before the meal. Now he sat quietly, looking
down before him, unconcerned about the others. John the Seducer
desired at once to urge some objections against the Young Person's
speech but was interrupted by Constantin who warned against discussions
and ruled that on this occasion only speeches were in order. John said
if that was the case, he would stipulate that he should be allowed to be
the last speaker. This again gave rise to a discussion as to the order
in which they were to speak, which Constantin closed by offering to
speak forthwith, against their recognizing his authority to appoint the
speakers in their turn.


(Constantin's Speech)


Constantin spoke as follows:

There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak,[26] and
now it seems to be the time to speak briefly, for our young friend
has spoken much and very strangely. His _vis comica_[27] has made
us struggle _ancipiti proelio_[28] because his speech was full of
doubts, as he himself is, sitting there now--a perplexed man who
knows not whether to laugh, or weep, or fall in love. In fact, had
I had foreknowledge of his speech, such as he demands one should
have of love, I should have forbidden him to speak; but now it is
too late. I shall bid you then, dear bellow-banqueters, "gladsome and
merry to be," and even if I cannot enforce this I shall ask you to forget
each speech so soon as it is made and to wash it down with a single
draught.

And now as to woman, about whom I shall speak. I too have pondered
about her, and I have finally discovered the category to which she
belongs. I too have sought, but I have found, too, and I have made a
matchless discovery which I shall now communicate to you. Woman is
understood correctly only when placed in the category of "the joke."

It is man's function to be absolute, to act in an absolute fashion,
or to give expression to the absolute. Woman's sphere lies in her
relativity.[29] Between beings so radically different, no true
reciprocal relation can exist. Precisely in this incommensurability
lies the joke. And with woman the joke was born into the world. It
is to be understood, however, that man must know how to stick to
his role of being absolute; for else nothing is seen--that is to
say, something exceedingly common is seen, viz., that man and woman
fit each other, he as a half man and she as a half man.

The joke is not an æsthetic, but an abortive ethical, category. Its
effect on thought is about the same as the impression we receive if a
man were solemnly to begin making a speech, recite a comma or two
with his pronouncement, then say "hm!"--"dash"--and then stop.
Thus with woman. One tries to cover her with the ethical category,
one thinks of human nature, one opens one's eyes, one fastens one's
glances on the most excellent maiden in question, an effort is
made to redeem the claims of the ethical demand; and then one
grows ill at ease and says to one's self: ah, this is undoubtedly
a joke! The joke lies, indeed, in applying that category to her
and measuring her by it, because it would be idle to expect serious
results from her; but just that is the joke. Because if one could
demand it of her it would not be a joke at all. A mighty poor joke
indeed it would be, to place her under the air-pump and draw the air out
of her--indeed it were a shame; but to blow her up to supernatural
size and let her imagine herself to have attained all the ideality which
a little maiden of sixteen imagines she has, that is the beginning of
the game and, indeed, the beginning of a highly entertaining performance.
No youth has half so much imaginary ideality as a young girl, but: "We
shall soon be even" as says the tailor in the proverb; for her ideality
is but an illusion.

If one fails to consider woman from this point of view she may cause
irreparable harm; but through my conception of her she becomes harmless
and amusing. For a man there is nothing more shocking than to catch
himself twaddling. It destroys all true ideality; for one may repent of
having been a rascal, and one may feel sorry for not having meant
a word of what one said; but to have talked nonsense, sheer nonsense,
to have meant all one said and behold! it was all nonsense--that
is too disgusting for repentance incarnate to put up with. But this is
not the case with woman. She has a prescriptive right to transfigure
herself--in less than 24 hours--in the most innocent and pardonable
nonsense; for far is it from her ingenuous soul to wish to deceive
one! Indeed, she meant all she said, and now she says the precise
opposite, but with the same amiable frankness, for now she is
willing to stake everything on what she said last. Now in case a man
in all seriousness surrenders to love he may be called fortunate indeed
if he succeeds in obtaining an insurance--if, indeed, he is able to
obtain it anywhere; for so inflammable a material as woman is most
likely to arouse the suspicions of an insurance agent. Just consider
for a moment what he has done in thus identifying himself with her!
If, some fine New Year's night she goes off like some fireworks he
will promptly follow suit; and even if this should not happen he
will have many a close call. And what may he not lose! He may lose
his all; for there is but one absolute antithesis to the absolute,
and that is nonsense. Therefore, let him not seek refuge in some
society for morally tainted individuals, for he is not morally
tainted--far from it; only, he has been reduced _in absurdum_
and beatified in nonsense; that is, has been made a fool of.

This will never happen among men. If a man should sputter off in
this fashion I would scorn him. If he should fool me by his cleverness
I need but apply the ethical category to him, and the danger is
trifling. If things go too far I shall put a bullet through his brain;
but to challenge a woman--what is that, if you please? Who does
not see that it is a joke, just as when Xerxes had the sea whipped?
When Othello murders Desdemona, granting she really had been guilty,
he has gained nothing, for he has been duped, and a dupe he remains;
for even by his murdering her he only makes a concession with regard
to a consequence which originally made him ridiculous; whereas
Elvira[30] may be an altogether pathetic figure when arming herself
with a dagger to obtain revenge. The fact that Shakespeare has
conceived Othello as a tragic figure (even disregarding the calamity
that Desdemona is innocent) is to be explained and, indeed, to perfect
satisfaction, by the hero being a colored person. For a colored
person, dear fellow-banqueters, who cannot be assumed to represent
spiritual qualities--a colored person, I say, who therefore becomes
green in his face when his ire is aroused (which is a physiological
fact), a colored man may, indeed, become tragic if he is deceived
by a woman; just as a woman has all the pathos of tragedy on her
side when she is betrayed by a man. A man who flies into a rage
may perhaps become tragic; but a man of whom one may expect a
developed mentality, he will either not become jealous, or he
will become ridiculous if he does; and most of all when he comes
running with a dagger in his hand.

A pity that Shakespeare has not presented us with a comedy of this
description in which the claim raised by a woman's infidelity is turned
down by irony; for not every one who is able to see the comical element
in this situation is able also to develop the thought and give it
dramatic embodiment. Let one but imagine Socrates surprising Xanthippe
in the act--for it would be un-Socratic even to think of Socrates
being particularly concerned about his wife's fidelity, or still worse,
spying on her--imagine it, and I believe that the fine smile which
transformed the ugliest man in Athens into the handsomest, would for the
first time have turned into a roar of laughter. It is incomprehensible
why Aristophanes, who so frequently made Socrates the butt of his
ridicule, neglected to have him run on the stage shouting: "Where is
she, where is she, so that I may kill her, i.e., my unfaithful
Xanthippe." For really it does not matter greatly whether or no
Socrates was made a cuckold, and all that Xanthippe may do in this
regard is wasted labor, like snapping one's fingers in one's pocket;
for Socrates remains the same intellectual hero, even with a horn on his
forehead. But if he had in fact become jealous and had wanted to kill
Xanthippe--alas! then would Xanthippe have exerted a power over
him such as the entire Greek nation and his sentence of death could
not--to make him ridiculous.

A cuckold is comical, then, with respect to his wife; but he may be
regarded as becoming tragical with respect to other men. In this fact we
may find an explanation of the Spanish conception of honor. But the
tragic element resides chiefly in his not being able to obtain redress,
and the anguish of his suffering consists really in its being devoid
of meaning--which is terrible enough. To shoot the woman, to
challenge her, to despise her, all this would only serve to render the
poor man still more ridiculous; for woman is the weaker sex. This
consideration enters in everywhere and confuses all. If she performs
a great deed she is admired more than man, because it is more than
was expected of her. If she is betrayed, all the pathos is on her
side; but if a man is deceived one has scant sympathy and little
patience while he is present--and laughs at him when his back is
turned.

Look you, therefore is it advisable betimes to consider woman as
a joke. The entertainment she affords is simply incomparable. Let one
consider her a fixed quantity, and one's self a relative one; let one by
no means contradict her, for that would simply be helping her; let one
never doubt what she says but, rather, believe her every word; let one
gallivant about her, with eyes rendered unsteady by unspeakable
admiration and blissful intoxication, and with the mincing steps of a
worshipper; let one languishingly fall on one's knees, then lift up one's
eyes up to her languishingly and heave a breath again; let one do all
she bids one, like an obedient slave. And now comes the cream of the
joke. We need no proof that woman can speak, i.e., use words.
Unfortunately, however, she does not possess sufficient reflection for
making sure against her in the long run--which is, at most, eight
days--contradicting herself; unless indeed man, by contradicting
her, exerts a regulative influence. So the consequence is that within a
short time confusion will reign supreme. If one had not done what she
told one to, the confusion would pass unnoticed; for she forgets again
as quickly as she talks. But since her admirer has done all, and has
been at her beck and call in every instance, the confusion is only too
glaring.

The more gifted the woman, the more amusing the situation. For the
more gifted she is, the more imagination she will possess. Now, the
more imagination she possesses, the greater airs she will give herself
and the greater the confusion which is bound to become evident in the
next instant. In life, such entertainment is rarely had, because this
blind obedience to a woman's whims occurs but seldom. And if it does,
in some languishing swain, most likely he is not qualified to see the
fun. The fact is, the ideality a little maiden assumes in moments when
her imagination is at work is encountered nowhere else, whether in
gods or man; but it is all the more entertaining to believe her and
to add fuel to the fire.

As I remarked, the fun is simply incomparable--indeed, I know
it for a fact, because I have at times not been able to sleep at night
with the mere thought of what new confusions I should live to see,
through the agency of my sweetheart and my humble zeal to please her.
Indeed, no one who gambles in a lottery will meet with more remarkable
combinations than he who has a passion for this game. For this is sure,
that every woman without exception possesses the same qualifications
for being resolved and transfigured in nonsense with a gracefulness, a
nonchalance, an assurance such as befits the weaker sex.

Being a right-minded lover one naturally discovers every possible
charm in one's beloved. Now, when discovering genius in the above
sense, one ought not to let it remain a mere possibility but ought,
rather, to develop it into virtuosity. I do not need to be more specific,
and more cannot be said in a general way, yet every one will understand
me. Just as one may find entertainment in balancing a cane on one's
nose, in swinging a tumbler in a circle without spilling a drop, in
dancing between eggs, and in other games as amusing and profitable,
likewise, and not otherwise, in living with his beloved the lover will
have a source of incomparable entertainment and food for most
interesting study. In matters pertaining to love let one have absolute
belief, not only in her protestations of fidelity--one soon tires
of that game--but in all those explosions of inviolable Romanticism
by which she would probably perish if one did not contrive a safety-valve
through which the sighs and the smoke, and "the aria of Romanticism[31]"
may escape and make her worshipper happy. Let one compare her admiringly
to Juliet, the difference being only that no person ever as much as
thought of touching a hair on her Romeo's head. With regard to
intellectual matters, let one hold her capable of all and, if one has
been lucky enough to find the right woman, in a trice one will have
a cantankerous authoress, whilst wonderingly shading one's eyes with
one's hand and duly admiring what the little black hen may yield
besides.[32] It is altogether incomprehensible why Socrates
did not choose this course of action instead of bickering with
Xanthippe--oh, well! to be sure he wished to acquire practice,
like the riding master who, even though he has the best trained
horse, yet knows how to tease him in such fashion that there is
good reason for breaking him in again.[33]

Let me be a little more concrete, in order to illustrate a particular
and highly interesting phenomenon. A great deal has been said about
feminine fidelity, but rarely with any discretion.[34] From a purely
æsthetic point of view this fidelity is to be regarded as a piece of
poetic fiction which steps on the stage to find her lover--a fiction
which sits by the spinning wheel and waits for her lover to come;
but when she has found him, or he has come, why, then æsthetics is
at a loss. Her infidelity, on the other hand, as contrasted with
her previous fidelity, is to be judged chiefly with regard to its
ethical import, when jealousy will appear as a tragic passion.
There are three possibilities, so the case is favorable for woman;
for there are two cases of fidelity, as against one of infidelity.
Inconceivably great is her fidelity when she is not altogether sure
of her cavalier; and ever so inconceivably great is it when he repels
her fidelity. The third case would be her infidelity. Now granted one
has sufficient intellect and objectivity to make reflections, one will
find sufficient justification, in what has been said, for my category
of "the joke." Our young friend whose beginning in a manner deceived
me seemed to be on the point of entering into this matter, but backed
out again, dismayed at the difficulty. And yet the explanation
is not difficult, providing one really sets about it seriously,
to make unrequited love and death correspond to one another, and
providing one is serious enough to stick to his thought--and
so much seriousness one ought to have--for the sake of the joke.

Of course this phrase of unrequited love being death originated
either with a woman or a womanish male. Its origin is easily made out,
seeing that it is one of those categorical outbursts which, spoken with
great bravado, on the spur of the moment, may count on a great and
immediate applause; for although this business is said to be a
matter of life and death, yet the phrase is meant for immediate
consumption--like cream-puffs. Although referring to daily experience
it is by no means binding on him who is to die, but only obliges
the listener to rush post-haste to the assistance of the dying
lover. If a man should take to using such phrases it would not be
amusing at all, for he would be too despicable to laugh at. Woman,
however, possesses genius, is lovable in the measure she possesses it,
and is amusing at all times. Well, then, the languishing lady dies of
love--why certainly, for did she not say so herself? In this matter
she is pathetic, for woman has enough courage to say what no man would
have the courage to do--so then she dies! In saying so I have
measured her by ethical standards. Do ye likewise, dear fellow-banqueters,
and understand your Aristotle aright, now! He observes very correctly
that woman cannot be used in tragedy.[35] And very certainly, her
proper sphere is the pathetic and serious divertissement, the
half-hour face, not the five-act drama. So then she dies. But should
she for that reason not be able to love again? Why not?--that is,
if it be possible to restore her to life. Now, having been restored
to life, she is of course a new being--another person, that is, and
begins afresh and falls in love for the first time: nothing remarkable
in that! Ah, death, great is thy power; not the most violent emetic
and not the most powerful laxative could ever have the same purging
effect!

The resulting confusion is capital, if one but is attentive and
does not forget. A dead man is one of the most amusing characters
to be met with in life. Strange that more use is not made of
him on the stage, for in life he is seen, now and then. When you come
to think of it, even one who has only been seemingly dead is a comical
figure; but one who was really dead certainly contributes to our
entertainment all one can reasonably expect of a man. All depends
on whether one is attentive. I myself had my attention called to it,
one day, as I was walking with one of my acquaintances. A couple
passed us. I judged from the expression on his face that he knew them
and asked whether that was the case. "Why, yes," he answered, "I know
them very well, and especially the lady, for she is my departed
one."--"What departed one?" I asked.--"Why, my departed first
love," he answered. "Indeed, this is a strange affair. She said:
I shall die. And that very same moment she departed, naturally enough,
by death--else one might have insured her beforehand in the
widow's insurance. Too late! Dead she was and dead she remained;
and now I wander about, as says the poet, vainly seeking the grave of
my lady-love that I may shed my tears thereon." Thus this broken-hearted
man who remained alone in the world, though it consoled him to find
her pretty far along with some other man.

It is a good thing for the girls, thought I, that they don't have to
be buried, every time they die; for if parents have hitherto considered
a boy-child to be the more expensive, the girls might become even
more so!

A simple case of infidelity is not as amusing, by far. I mean, if a
girl should fall in love with some one else and should say to her lover:
"I cannot help it, save me from myself!" But to die from sorrow because
she cannot endure being separated from her lover by his journey to the
West Indies, to have put up with his departure, however,--and
then, at his return, be not only not dead, but attached to some one
else for all time--that certainly is a strange fate for a lover to
undergo. No wonder, then, that the heart-broken man at times consoled
himself with the burthen of an old song which runs: "Hurrah for you and
me, I say, we never shall forget that day!"

Now forgive me, dear fellow-banqueters, if I have spoken at too
great length; and empty a glass to love and to woman. Beautiful she
is and lovely, if she be considered æsthetically. That is undeniable.
But, as has often been said, and as I shall say also: one ought not to
remain standing here, but should go on.[36] Consider her, then,
ethically and you will hardly have begun to do so before the humor
of it will become apparent. Even Plato and Aristotle assume that
woman is an imperfect form, an irrational quantity, that is, one
which might some time, in a better world, be transformed into a
man. In this life one must take her as she is. And what this is becomes
apparent very soon; for she will not be content with the æsthetic
sphere, but goes on, she wants to become emancipated, and she has the
courage to say so. Let her wish be fulfilled and the amusement will be
simply incomparable.


When Constantin had finished speaking he forthwith ruled Victor
Eremita to begin. He spoke as follows:


(Victor Eremita's Speech)


As will be remembered, Plato offers thanks to the gods for four
things. In the fourth place he is grateful for having been permitted
to be a contemporary of Socrates. For the three other boons mentioned
by him,[37] an earlier Greek philosopher[38] had already thanked
the gods, and so I conclude that they are worthy our gratitude. But
alas!--even if I wanted to express my gratitude like these Greeks I
would not be able to do so for what was denied me. Let me then
collect my soul in gratitude for the one good which was conferred
on me also--that I was made a man and not a woman.

To be a woman is something so curious, so heterogeneous and
composite that no predicate will fully express these qualities;
and if I should use many predicates they would contradict one
another in such fashion that only a woman would be able to tolerate
the result and, what is worse, feel happy about it. The fact that
she really signifies less than man--that is not her misfortune,
and still less so if she got to know it, for it might be borne
with fortitude. No, her misfortune consists in her life's having
become devoid of fixed meaning through a romantic conception of
things, by virtue of which, now she signifies all, and now, nothing at
all; without ever finding out what she really does signify--and
even that is not her misfortune but, rather, the fact that, being
a woman, she never will be able to find out. As for myself, if I
were a woman, I should prefer to be one in the Orient and as a
slave; for to be a slave, neither more nor less, is at any rate
something, in comparison with being, now heyday, now nothing.

Even if a woman's life did not contain such contrasts, the distinction
she enjoys, and which is rightly assumed to be hers as a woman--a
distinction she does not share with man--would by itself point to
the meaninglessness of her life. The distinction I refer to is
that of gallantry. To be gallant to woman is becoming in men. Now
gallantry consists very simply in conceiving in fantastic categories
that person to whom one is gallant. To be gallant to a man is,
therefore, an insult, for he begs to be excused from the application
of fantastic categories to him. For the fair sex, however, gallantry
signifies a tribute, a distinction, which is essentially its
privilege. Ah me, if only a single cavalier were gallant to them
the case would not be so serious. But far from it! At bottom every
man is gallant, he is unconsciously so. This signifies, therefore,
that it is life itself which has bestowed this perquisite on the
fair sex. Woman on her part unconsciously accepts it. Here we have
the same trouble again; for if only a single woman did so, another
explanation would be necessary. This is life's characteristic irony.

Now if gallantry contained the truth it ought to be reciprocal,
i.e., gallantry would be the accepted quotation for the stated
difference between beauty on the one hand, and power, astuteness,
and strength, on the other. But this is not the case, gallantry
is essentially woman's due; and the fact that she unconsciously
accepts it may be explained through the solicitude of nature
for the weak and those treated in a step-motherly fashion by her,
who feel more than recompensed by an illusion. But precisely this
illusion is her misfortune. It is not seldom the case that nature
comes to the assistance of an afflicted creature by consoling him
with the notion that he is the most beautiful. If that is so, why,
then we may say that nature made good the deficiency since now
the creature is endowed with even more than could be reasonably
demanded. But to be beautiful only in one's imagination, and not
to be overcome, indeed, by sadness, but to be fooled into an
illusion--why, that is still worse mockery. Now, as to being
afflicted, woman certainly is far from having been treated in a
step-motherly fashion by nature; still she is so in another sense
inasmuch as she never can free herself from the illusion with which
life has consoled her.

Gathering together one's impressions of a woman's existence,
in order to point out its essential features, one is struck by
the fact that every woman's life gives one an entirely fantastic
impression. In a far more decisive sense than man she may be said
to have turning points in her career; for her turning points
turn everything upside down. In one of Tieck's[39] Romantic dramas
there occurs a person who, having once been king of Mesopotamia,
now is a green-grocer in Copenhagen. Exactly as fantastic is
every feminine existence. If the girl's name is Juliana, her life
is as follows: erstwhile empress in the wide domains of love,
and titular queen of all the exaggerations of tomfoolery; now,
Mrs. Peterson, corner Bath Street.

When a child, a girl is less highly esteemed than a boy. When a
little older, one does not know exactly what to make of her. At
last she enters that decisive period in which she holds absolute
sway. Worshipfully man approaches her as a suitor. Worshipfully,
for so does every suitor, it is not the scheme of a crafty deceiver.
Even the executioner, when laying down his _fasces_ to go a-wooing,
even he bends his knee, although he is willing to offer himself up,
within a short time, to domestic executions which he finds so natural
that he is far from seeking any excuse for them in the fact that
public executions have grown so few. The cultured person behaves in
the very same manner. He kneels, he worships, he conceives his
lady-love in the most fantastic categories; and then he very quickly
forgets his kneeling position--in fact, he knew, full well the while
he knelt that it was fantastic to do so.

If I were a woman I would prefer to be sold by my father to the
highest bidder, as is the custom in the Orient; for there is at
least some sense in such a deal. What misfortune to have been born
a woman! Yet her misfortune really consists in her not being able
to comprehend it, being a woman. If she does complain, she complains
rather about her Oriental, than her Occidental, status. But if I
were a woman I would first of all refuse to be wooed, and resign
myself to belong to the weaker sex, if such is the case, and
be careful--which is most important if one is proud--of not going
beyond the truth. However, that is of but little concern to her.
Juliana is in the seventh heaven, and Mrs. Peterson submits to
her fate.

Let me, then, thank the gods that I was born a man and not a woman.
And still, how much do I forego! For is not all poetry, from the
drinking song to the tragedy, a deification of woman? All the worse
for her and for him who admires her; for if he does not look out
he will, all of a sudden, have to pull a long face. The beautiful,
the excellent, all of man's achievement, owes its origin to woman,
for she inspires him. Woman is, indeed, the inspiring element in life.
How many a love-lorn shepherd has played on this theme, and how many
a shepherdess has listened to it! Verily, my soul is without envy
and feels only gratitude to the gods; for I would rather be a man,
though in humble station, but really so, than be a woman and an
indeterminate quantity, rendered happy by a delusion--I would rather
be a concrete thing, with a small but definite meaning, than an
abstraction which is to mean all.

As I have said, it is through woman that ideality is born into
the world and--what were man without her! There is many a man who
has become a genius through a woman, many a one a hero, many a one
a poet, many a one even a saint; but he did not become a genius
through the woman he married, for through her he only became a
privy councillor; he did not become a hero through the woman he
married, for through her he only became a general; he did not
become a poet through the woman he married, for through her he
only became a father; he did not become a saint through the woman
he married, for he did not marry, and would have married but
one--the one whom he did not marry; just as the others became
a genius, became a hero, became a poet through the help of the
woman they did not marry. If woman's ideality were in itself
inspiring, why, then the inspiring woman would be the one to
whom a man is united for life. But life tells a different story.
It is only by a negative relation to her that man is rendered
productive in his ideal endeavors. In this sense she is inspiring;
but to say that she is inspiring, without qualifying one's statement,
is to be guilty of a paralogism[40] which one must be a woman to
overlook. Or has any one ever heard of any man having become a
poet through his wife? So long as man does not possess her she
inspires him. It is this truth which gives rise to the illusions
entertained in poetry and by women. The fact that he does not possess
her signifies, either, that he is still fighting for her--thus
has woman inspired many a one and rendered him a knight; but has
any one ever heard of any man having been rendered a knight valiant
through his wife? Or, the fact that he does not possess her signifies
that he cannot obtain her by any manner of means--thus has woman
inspired many a one and roused his ideality; that is, if there is
anything in him worth while. But a wife, who has things ever so
much worth while for her husband, will hardly arouse any ideal
strivings in him. Or, again, the fact that he does not possess
her signifies that he is pursuing an ideal. Perchance he loves
many, but loving many is also a kind of unrequited love; and yet
the ideality of his soul is to be seen in this striving and yearning,
and not in the small bits of lovableness which make up the sum
total of the contributions of all those he loves.

The highest ideality a woman can arouse in a man consists, in fact,
in the awakening within him of the consciousness of immortality.
The point of this proof lies in what one might call the necessity
of a reply. Just as one may remark about some play that it cannot
end without this or that person getting in his say, likewise
(says ideality) our existence cannot be all over with death: I
demand a reply! This proof is frequently furnished, in a positive
fashion, in the public advertiser. I hold that to be entirely proper,
for if proof is to be made in the public advertiser it must be made
in a positive fashion. Thus: Mrs. Petersen, we learn, has lived a
number of years, until in the night of the 24th it pleased Providence,
etc. . This produces in Mr. Petersen an attack of reminiscences from
his courting days or, to express it quite plainly, nothing but seeing
her again will ever console him. For this blissful meeting he
prepares himself, in the meanwhile, by taking unto himself another
wife; for, to be sure, this marriage is by no means as poetic as the
first--still it is a good imitation. This is the proof positive. Mr.
Petersen is not satisfied with demanding a reply, no, he wants a
meeting again in the hereafter.

As is well known, a base metal will often show the gleam of precious
metal. This is the brief silver-gleam. With respect to the base
metal this is a tragic moment, for it must once for all resign itself
to being a base metal. Not so with Mr. Petersen. The possession of
ideality is by rights inherent in every person--and now, if I laugh
at Mr. Petersen it is not because he, being in reality of base metal,
had but a single silver-gleam; but, rather, because just this
silver-gleam betrays his having become a base metal. Thus does the
philistine look most ridiculous when, arrayed in ideality, he affords
fitting occasion to say, with Holberg: "What! does that cow wear a
fine dress, too?[41]"

The case is this: whenever a woman arouses ideality in man, and
thereby the consciousness of immortality, she always does so
negatively. He who really became a genius, a hero, a poet, a saint
through woman, he has by that very fact seized on the essence of
immortality. Now if the inspiring element were positively present
in woman, why, then a man's wife, and only his wife, ought to
awaken in him the consciousness of immortality. But the reverse
holds true. That is, if she is really to awaken ideality in
her husband she must die. Mr. Petersen, to be sure, is not affected,
for all that. But if woman, by her death, does awaken man's ideality,
then is she indeed the cause of all the great things poetry
attributes to her; but note well: that which she did in a positive
fashion for him in no wise roused his ideality. In fact, her
significance in this regard becomes the more doubtful the longer
she lives, because she will at length really begin to wish to
signify something positive. However, the more positive the proof
the less it proves; for then Mr. Petersen's longing will be for
some past common experiences whose content was, to all intents
and purposes, exhausted when they were had. Most positive of all
the proof becomes if the object of his longing concerns their
marital spooning--that time when they visited the Deer Park
together! In the same way one might suddenly feel a longing for
the old pair of slippers one used to be so comfortable in; but
that proof is not exactly a proof for the immortality of the soul.
On the other hand, the more negative the proof, the better it is;
for the negative is higher than the positive, inasmuch as it
concerns our immortality, and is thus the only positive value.

Woman's main significance lies in her negative contribution,
whereas her positive contributions are as nothing in comparison
but, on the contrary, pernicious. It is this truth which life keeps
from her, consoling her with an illusion which surpasses all that
might arise in any man's brain, and with parental care ordering
life in such fashion that both language and everything else confirm
her in her illusion. For even if she be conceived as the very opposite
of inspiring, and rather as the well-spring of all corruption;
whether now we imagine that with her, sin came into the world, or
that it is her infidelity which ruined all--our conception of her
is always gallant. That is, when hearing such opinions one might
readily assume that woman were really able to become infinitely
more culpable than man, which would, indeed, amount to an immense
acknowledgment of her powers. Alas, alas! the case is entirely
different. There is a secret reading of this text which woman
cannot comprehend; for, the very next moment, all life owns to the
same conception as the state, which makes man responsible for his
wife. One condemns her as man never is condemned (for only a real
sentence is passed on him, and there the matter ends), not with
her receiving a milder sentence; for in that case not all of her
life would be an illusion, but with the case against her being
dismissed and the public, i.e., life, having to defray the costs.
One moment, woman is supposed to be possessed of all possible
wiles, the next moment, one laughs at him whom she deceived, which
surely is a contradiction. Even such a case as that of Potiphar's
wife does not preclude the possibility of her having really been
seduced. Thus has woman an enormous possibility, such as no man
has--an enormous possibility; but her reality is in proportion.
And most terrible of all is the magic of illusion in which she
feels herself happy.

Let Plato then thank the gods for having been born a contemporary
of Socrates: I envy him; let him offer thanks for being a Greek:
I envy him; but when he is grateful for having been born a man
and not a woman I join him with all my heart. If I had been born
a woman and could under stand what now I can understand--it were
terrible! But if I had been born a woman and therefore could not
understand it--that were still more terrible!

But if the case is as I stated it, then it follows that one had
better refrain from any positive relation with woman. Wherever she
is concerned one has to reckon with that inevitable hiatus which
renders her happy as she does not detect the illusion, but which
would be a man's undoing if he detected it.

I thank the gods, then, that I was born a man and not a woman;
and I thank them, furthermore, that no woman by some life-long
attachment holds me in duty bound to be constantly reflecting
that it ought not to have been.

Indeed, what a passing strange device is marriage! And what makes
it all the stranger is the suggestion that it is to be a step
taken without thought. And yet no step is more decisive, for nothing
in life is as inexorable and masterful as the marriage tie. And now
so important a step as marriage ought, so we are told, to be taken
without reflection! Yet marriage is not something simple but something
immensely complex and indeterminate. Just as the meat of the turtle
smacks of all kinds of meat, so likewise does marriage have a taste
of all manner of things; and just as the turtle is a sluggish animal,
likewise is marriage a sluggish thing. Falling in love is, at least,
a simple thing, but marriage--! Is it something heathen or something
Christian, something spiritual or something profane, or something
civil, or something of all things? Is it an expression of an
inexplicable love, the elective affinity of souls in delicate accord
with one another; or is it a duty, or a partnership, or a mere
convenience, or the custom of certain countries--or is it a duty,
or a partnership, or a mere convenience, or the custom of certain
countries--or is it a little of all these? Is one to order the
music for it from the town musician or the organist, or is one to
have a little from both? Is it the minister or the police sergeant
who is to make the speech and enroll the names in the book of
life--or in the town register? Does marriage blow a tune on a
comb, or does it listen to the whisperings "like to those of the
fairies from the grottoes of a summer night"?[42]

And now every Darby imagines he performed such a potpourri, such
incomparably complex music, in getting married--and imagines that
he is still performing it while living a married life! My dear
fellow-banqueters, ought we not, in default of a wedding present
and congratulations, give each of the conjugal partners a demerit
for repeated inattentiveness? It is taxing enough to express a
single idea in one's life; but to think something so complicated
as marriage and, consequently, bring it under one head; to think
something so complicated and yet to do justice to each and every
element in it, and have everything present at the same time--verily,
he is a great man who can accomplish all this! And still every
Benedict accomplishes it--so he does, no doubt; for does he not
say that he does it unconsciously? But if this is to be done
unconsciously it must be through some higher form of unconsciousness
permeating all one's reflective powers. But not a word is said
about this! And to ask any married man about it means just wasting
one's time.

He who has once committed a piece of folly will constantly be
pursued by its consequences. In the case of marriage the folly
consists in one's having gotten into a mess, and the punishment,
in recognizing, when it is too late, what one has done. So you will
find that the married man, now, becomes chesty, with a bit of
pathos, thinking he has done something remarkable in having entered
wedlock; now, puts his tail between his legs in dejection; then
again, praises marriage in sheer self-defense. But as to a thought-unit
which might serve to hold together the _disjecta membra_[43]
of the most heterogeneous conceptions of life contained in marriage--for
that we shall wait in vain.

Therefore, to be a mere Benedict is humbug, and to be a seducer is
humbug, and to wish to experiment with woman for the sake of "the
joke" is also humbug. In fact, the two last mentioned methods will
be seen to involve concessions to woman on the part of man quite
as large as those found in marriage. The seducer wishes to rise
in his own estimation by deceiving her; but this very fact that
he deceives and wishes to deceive--that he cares to deceive, is
also a demonstration of his dependence on woman. And the same
holds true of him who wishes to experiment with her.

If I were to imagine any possible relation with woman it would
be one so saturated with reflection that it would, for that very
reason, no longer be any relation with her at all. To be an excellent
husband and yet on the sly seduce every girl; to seem a seducer and
yet harbor within one all the ardor of romanticism--there would be
something to that, for the concession in the first instance were
then annihilated in the second. Certain it is that man finds his
true ideality only in such a reduplication. All merely unconscious
existence must be obliterated, and its obliteration ever cunningly
guarded by some sham expression. Such a reduplication is incomprehensible
to woman, for it removes from her the possibility of expressing man's
true nature in one term. If it were, possible for woman to exist in
such a reduplication, no erotic relation with her were thinkable. But,
her nature being such as we all know it to be, any disturbance of the
erotic relation is brought about by man's true nature which ever
consists precisely in the annihilation of that in which she has
her being.

Am I then preaching the monastic life and rightly called Eremita? By
no means. You may as well eliminate the cloister, for after all it
is only a direct expression of spirituality and as such but a vain
endeavor to express it in direct terms. It makes small difference
whether you use gold, or silver, or paper money; but he who does not
spend a farthing but is counterfeit, he will comprehend me. He
to whom every direct expression is but a fraud, he and he only,
is safeguarded better than if he lived in a cloister-cell--he
will be a hermit even if he travelled in an omnibus day and night.

Scarcely had Victor finished when the Dressmaker jumped to his feet
and threw over a bottle of wine standing before him; then he spoke
as follows:


(The Dressmaker's Speech)


Well spoken, dear fellow-banqueters, well spoken! The longer I hear
you speak the more I grow convinced that you are fellow-conspirators--I
greet you as such, I understand you as such; for fellow-conspirators
one can make out from afar. And yet, what know you? What does your
bit of theory to which you wish to give the appearance of experience,
your bit of experience which you make over into a theory--what does
it amount to? For every now and then you believe her a moment
and--are caught in a moment! No, I know woman--from her weak side,
that is to say, I know her. I shrink from no means to make sure about
what I have learned; for I am a madman, and a madman one must be to
understand her, and if one has not been one before, one will become
a madman, once one understands her. The robber has his hiding place
by the noisy high-road, and the ant-lion his funnel in the loose
sand, and the pirate his haunts by the roaring sea: likewise have
I may fashion-shop in the very midst of the teeming streets, seductive,
irresistible to woman as is the Venusberg to men. There, in a
fashion-shop, one learns to know woman, in a practical way and
without any theoretical ado.

Now, if fashion meant nothing than that woman in the heat of her
desire threw off all her clothing--why, then it would stand for
something. But this is not the case, fashion is not plain sensuality,
not tolerated debauchery, but an illicit trade in indecency authorized
as proper. And, just as in heathen Prussia the marriageable girl
wore a bell whose ringing served as a signal to the men, likewise
is a woman's existence in fashion a continual bell-ringing, not
for debauchees but for lickerish voluptuaries. People hold Fortune
to be a woman--ah, yes it is, to be sure, fickle; still, it is fickle
in something, as it may also give much; and insofar it is not a
woman. No; but fashion is a woman, for fashion is fickleness in
nonsense, and is consistent only in its becoming ever more crazy.

One hour in my shop is worth more than days and years without, if
it really be one's desire to learn to know woman; in my shop, for
it is the only one in the capital, there is no thought of competition.
Who, forsooth, would dare to enter into competition with one who
has entirely devoted himself, and is still devoting himself, as
high-priest in this idol worship? No, there is not a distinguished
assemblage which does not mention my name first and last; and
there is not a middle-class gathering where my name, whenever
mentioned, does not inspire sacred awe, like that of the king;
and there is no dress so idiotic but is accompanied by whispers
of admiration when its owner proceeds down the hall--provided
it bears my name; and there is not the lady of gentle birth who
dares pass my shop by, nor the girl of humble origin but passes
it sighing and thinking: if only I could afford it! Well, neither
was she deceived. I deceive no one; I furnish the finest goods
and the most costly, and at the lowest price, indeed, I sell
below cost. The fact is, I do not wish to make a profit. On the
contrary, every year I sacrifice large sums. And yet do I mean
to win, I mean to, I shall spend my last farthing in order to
corrupt, in order to bribe, the tools of fashion so that I may
win the game. To me it is a delight beyond compare to unroll
the most precious stuffs, to cut them out, to clip pieces from
genuine Brussels-lace, in order to make a fool's costume--I sell
to the lowest prices, genuine goods and in style.

You believe, perhaps, that woman wants to be dressed fashionably
only at certain times? No such thing, she wants to be so all the
time and that is her only thought. For a woman does have a mind,
only it is employed about as well as is the Prodigal Son's substance;
and woman does possess the power of reflection in an incredibly high
degree, for there is nothing so holy but she will in no time
discover it to be reconcilable with her finery--and the chiefest
expression of finery is fashion. What wonder if she does discover
it to be reconcilable; for is not fashion holy to her? And there
is nothing so insignificant but she certainly will know how to
make it count in her finery--and the most fatuous expression of
finery is fashion. And there is nothing, nothing in all her attire,
not the least ribbon, of whose relation to fashion she has not a
definite conception and concerning which she is not immediately
aware whether the lady who just passed by noticed it; because,
for whose benefit does she dress, if not for other ladies!

Even in my shop where she comes to be fitted out _à la mode_,
even there she is in fashion. Just as there is a special bathing
costume and a special riding habit, likewise there is a particular
kind of dress which it is the fashion to wear to the dressmaker's
shop. That costume is not _insouciant_ in the same sense as is
the negligée a lady is pleased to be surprised in, earlier in the
forenoon, where the point is her belonging to the fair sex and
the coquetry lies in her letting herself be surprised. The dressmaker
costume, on the other hand, is calculated to be nonchalant and a
bit careless without her being embarrassed thereby; because a
dressmaker stands in a different relation to her from a cavalier.
The coquetry here consists in thus showing herself to a man who,
by reason of his station, does not presume to ask for the lady's
womanly recognition, but must be content with the perquisites
which fall abundantly to his share, without her ever thinking
of it; or without it even so much as entering her mind to play
the lady before a dressmaker. The point is, therefore, that her
being of the opposite sex is, in a certain sense, left out of
consideration, and her coquetry invalidated, by the superciliousness
of the noble lady who would smile if any one alluded to any
relation existing between her and her dressmaker. When visited
in her negligée she conceals herself, thus displaying her charms
by this very concealment. In my shop she exposes her charms with
the utmost nonchalance, for he is only a dressmaker--and she is
a woman. Now, her shawl slips down and bares some part of her
body, and if I did not know what that means, and what she expects,
my reputation would be gone to the winds. Now, she draws herself
up, _a priori_ fashion, now she gesticulates _a posteriori_;
now, she sways to and fro in her hips; now, she looks at herself
in the mirror and sees my admiring phiz behind her in the glass;
now, she minces her words; now, she trips along with short steps;
now, she hovers; now, she draws her foot after her in a slovenly
fashion; now, she lets herself sink softly into an arm-chair,
whilst I with humble demeanor offer her a flask of smelling salts
and with my adoration assuage her agitation; now, she strikes
after me playfully; now, she drops her handkerchief and, without
as much as a single motion, lets her relaxed arm remain in its
pendent position, whilst I bend down low to pick it up and return
it to her, receiving a little patronizing nod as a reward. These
are the ways of a lady of fashion when in my shop. Whether Diogenes[44]
made any impression on the woman who was praying in a somewhat
unbecoming posture, when he asked her whether she did not believe
the gods could see her from behind--that I do not know; but
this I do know, that if I should say to her ladyship kneeling
down in church: "The folds of your gown do not fall according
to fashion," she would be more alarmed than if she had given
offense to the gods. Woe to the outcast, the male Cinderella,
who has not comprehended this! _Pro dii immortales_,[45] what,
pray, is a woman who is not in fashion; _per deos obsecro_,[46]
and what when she is in fashion!

Whether all this is true? Well, make trial of it: let the swain,
when his beloved one sinks rapturously on his breast, whispering
unintelligibly: "thine forever," and hides her head on his bosom--let
him but say to, her: "My sweet Kitty, your coiffure is not at
all in fashion."--Possibly, men don't give thought to this; but he
who knows it, and has the reputation of knowing it, he is the most
dangerous man in the kingdom. What blissful hours the lover passes
with his sweetheart before marriage I do not know; but of the
blissful hours she spends in my shop he hasn't the slightest
inkling, either. Without my special license and sanction a marriage
is null and void, anyway--or else an entirely plebeian affair. Let
it be the very moment when they are to meet before the altar, let
her step forward with the very best conscience in the world that
everything was bought in my shop and tried on there--and now, if
I were to rush up and exclaim: "But mercy! gracious lady, your
myrtle wreath is all awry"--why, the whole ceremony might be
postponed, for aught I know. But men do not suspect these things,
one must be a dressmaker to know.

So immense is the power of reflection needed to fathom a woman's
thought that only a man who dedicates himself wholly to the task
will succeed, and even then only if gifted to start with. Happy
therefore the man who does not associate with any woman, for she
is not his, anyway, even if she be no other man's; for she is
possessed by that phantom born of the unnatural intercourse of
woman's reflection with itself, fashion. Do you see, for this
reason should woman always swear by fashion--then were there
some force in her oath; for after all, fashion is the thing she
is always thinking of, the only thing she can think together with,
and into, everything. For instance, the glad message has gone
forth from my shop to all fashionable ladies that fashion decrees
the use of a particular kind of head-dress to be worn in church,
and that this head-dress, again, must be somewhat different for
High Mass and for the afternoon service. Now when the bells are
ringing the carriage stops in front of my door. Her ladyship
descends (for also this has been decreed, that no one can adjust
that head-dress save I, the fashion-dealer), I rush out, making
low bows, and lead her into my cabinet. And whilst she languishingly
reposes I put everything in order. Now she is ready and has looked
at herself in the mirror; quick as any messenger of the gods I
hasten in advance, open the door of my cabinet with a bow, then
hasten to the door of my shop and lay my arm on my breast, like
some oriental slave; but, encouraged by a gracious courtesy, I
even dare to throw her an adoring and admiring kiss--now she
is seated in her carriage--oh dear! she left her hymn book behind.
I hasten out again and hand it to her through the carriage window,
I permit myself once more to remind her to hold her head a trifle
more to the right, and herself to arrange things, should her
head-dress become a bit disordered when descending. She drives
away and is edified.

You believe, perhaps, that it is only great ladies who worship
fashion, but far from it! Look at my sempstresses for whose dress
I spare no expense, so that the dogmas of fashion may be proclaimed
most emphatically from my shop. They form a chorus of half-witted
creatures, and I myself lead them on as high-priest, as a shining
example, squandering all, solely in order to make all womankind
ridiculous. For when a seducer makes the boast that every woman's
virtue has its price, I do not believe him; but I do believe that
every woman at an early time will be crazed by the maddening and
defiling introspection taught her by fashion, which will corrupt
her more thoroughly than being seduced. I have made trial more
than once. If not able to corrupt her myself I set on her a few
of fashion's slaves of her own station; for just as one may train
rats to bite rats, likewise is the crazed woman's sting like that
of the tarantula. And most especially dangerous is it when some
man lends his help.

Whether I serve the Devil or God I do not know; but I am right, I
shall be right, I will be, so long as I possess a single farthing,
I will be until the blood spurts out of my fingers. The physiologist
pictures the shape of woman to show the dreadful effects of wearing
a corset, and beside it he draws a picture of her normal figure.
That is all entirely correct, but only one of the drawings has the
validity of truth: they all wear corsets. Describe, therefore,
the miserable, stunted perversity of the fashion-mad woman,
describe the insidious introspection devouring her, and then
describe the womanly modesty which least of all knows about
itself--do so and you have judged woman, have in very truth
passed terrible sentence on her. If ever I discover such a girl
who is contented and demure and not yet corrupted by indecent
intercourse with women--she shall fall nevertheless. I shall
catch her in my toils, already she stands at the sacrificial
altar, that is to say, in my shop. With the most scornful glance
a haughty nonchalance can assume I measure her appearance, she
perishes with fright; a peal of laughter from the adjoining room
where sit my trained accomplices annihilates her. And afterwards,
when I have gotten her rigged up _à la mode_ and she looks crazier
than a lunatic, as crazy as one who would not be accepted even
in a lunatic asylum, then she leaves me in a state of bliss--no
man, not even a god, were able to inspire fear in her; for is
she not dressed in fashion?

Do you comprehend me now, do you comprehend why I call you
fellow-conspirators, even though in a distant way? Do you now
comprehend my conception of woman? Everything in life is a matter
of fashion, the fear of God is a matter of fashion, and so are
love, and crinolines, and a ring through the nose. To the utmost
of my ability will I therefore come to the support of the exalted
genius who wishes to laugh at the most ridiculous of all animals.
If woman has reduced everything to a matter of fashion, then will
I, with the help of fashion, prostitute her, as she deserves to
be; I have no peace, I the dressmaker, my soul rages when I think
of my task--she will yet be made to wear a ring through her nose.
Seek therefore no sweetheart, abandon love as you would the most
dangerous neighborhood; for the one whom you love would also be
made to go with a ring through her nose.

Thereupon John, called the Seducer, spoke as follows:


(The Speech of John the Seducer)


My dear boon companions, is Satan plaguing you? For, indeed, you
speak like so many hired mourners, your eyes are red with tears
and not with wine. You almost move me to tears also, for an
unhappy lover does have a miserable time of it in life. _Hinc illae
lacrimae._[47] I, however, am a happy lover, and my only wish
is to remain so. Very possibly, that is one of the concessions
to woman which Victor is so afraid of. Why not? Let it be a
concession! Loosening the lead foil of this bottle of champagne
also is a concession; letting its foaming contents flow into my
glass also is a concession; and so is raising it to my lips--now
I drain it--_concedo._[48] Now, however, it is empty, hence I
need no more concessions. Just the same with girls. If some
unhappy lover has bought his kiss too dearly, this proves to
me only that he does not know, either how to take what is coming
to him or how to do it. I never pay too much for this sort of
thing--that is a matter for the girls to decide. What this signifies?
To me it signifies the most beautiful, the most delicious, and
well-nigh the most persuasive, _argumentum ad hominem_; but since
every woman, at least once in her life, possesses this argumentative
freshness I do not see any reason why I should not let myself be
persuaded. Our young friend wishes to make this experience in
his thought. Why not buy a cream puff and be content with looking
at it? I mean to enjoy. No mere talk for me! Just as an old song
has it about a kiss: _es ist kaum zu sehn, es ist nur für Lippen,
die genau sich verstehn_[49]--understand each other so exactly
that any reflection about the matter is but an impertinence and
a folly. He who is twenty and does not grasp the existence of the
categorical imperative "enjoy thyself"--he is a fool; and he who
does not seize the opportunity is and remains a Christianfelder.[50]

However, you all are unhappy lovers, and that is why you are not
satisfied with woman as she is. The gods forbid! As she is she
pleases me, just as she is. Even Constantin's category of "the joke"
seems to contain a secret desire. I, on the other hand, I am gallant.
And why not? Gallantry costs nothing and gives one all and is the
condition for all erotic pleasure. Gallantly is the Masonic language
of the senses and of voluptuousness, between man and woman. It is a
natural language, as love's language in general is. It consists not
of sounds but of desires disguised and of ever changing wishes. That
an unhappy lover may be ungallant enough to wish to convert his
deficit into a draught payable in immortality--that I understand
well enough. That is to say, I for my part do not understand it;
for to me a woman has sufficient intrinsic value. I assure every
woman of this, it is the truth; and at the same time it is certain
that I am the only one who is not deceived by this truth. As to
whether a despoiled woman is worth less than man--about that I
find no information in my price list. I do not pick flowers already
broken, I leave them to the married men to use for Shrove-tide
decoration. Whether e. g. Edward wishes to consider the matter
again, and again fall in love with Cordelia,[51] or simply repeat
the affair in his reflection--that is his own business. Why
should I concern myself with other peoples' affairs! I explained
to her at an earlier time what I thought of her; and, in truth,
she convinced me, convinced me to my absolute satisfaction, that
my gallantry was well applied.

_Concedo. Concessi._[52] If I should meet with another Cordelia,
why then I shall enact a comedy "Ring number 2.[53]" But you
are unhappy lovers and have conspired together, and are worse
deceived than the girls, notwithstanding that you are richly
endowed by nature. But decision--the decision of desire, is the
most essential thing in life. Our young friend will always remain
an onlooker. Victor is an unpractical enthusiast. Constantin has
acquired his good sense at too great a cost; and the fashion
dealer is a madman. Stuff and nonsense! With all four of you busy
about one girl, nothing would come of it.

Let one have enthusiasm enough to idealize, taste enough to join
in the clinking of glasses at the festive board of enjoyment, sense
enough to break off--to break off absolutely, as does Death, madness
enough to wish to enjoy all over again--if you have all that you
will be the favorite of gods and girls.

But of what avail to speak here? I do not intend to make proselytes.
Neither is this the place for that. To be sure I love wine, to be
sure I love the abundance of a banquet--all that is good; but let
a girl be my company, and then I shall be eloquent. Let then
Constantin have my thanks for the banquet, and the wine, and the
excellent appointments--the speeches, however, were but indifferent.
But in order that things shall have a better ending I shall
now pronounce a eulogy on woman.

Just as he who is to speak in praise of the divinity must be
inspired by the divinity to speak worthily, and must therefore
be taught by the divinity as to what he shall say, likewise he
who would speak of women. For woman, even less than the divinity,
is a mere figment of man's brain, a day-dream, or a notion that
occurs to one and which one may argue about pro et contra. Nay,
one learns from woman alone what to say of her. And the more
teachers one has had, the better. The first time one is a disciple,
the next time one is already over the chief difficulties, just
as one learns in formal and learned disputations how to use
the last opponent's compliments against a new opponent. Nevertheless
nothing is lost. For as little as a kiss is a mere sample of good
things, and as little as an embrace is an exertion, just as little
is this experience exhaustive. In fact it is essentially different
from the mathematical proof of a theorem, which remains ever the
same, even though other letters be substituted. This method is
one befitting mathematics and ghosts, but not love and women,
because each is a new proof, corroborating the truth of the
theorem in a different manner. It is my joy that, far from being
less perfect than man, the female sex is, on the contrary, the
more perfect. I shall, however, clothe my speech in a myth; and I
shall exult, on woman's account whom you have so unjustly maligned,
if my speech pronounce judgment on your souls, if the enjoyment
of her beckon you only to flee you, as did the fruits from Tantalus;
because you have fled, and thereby insulted, woman. Only thus,
forsooth, may she be insulted, even though she scorn it, and though
punishment instantly falls on him who had the audacity. I, however,
insult no one. That is but the notion of married men, and a slander;
whereas, in reality, I respect her more highly than does the man
she is married to.

Originally there was but one sex, so the Greeks relate, and that
was man's. Splendidly endowed he was, so he did honor to the
gods--so splendidly endowed that the same happened to them as
sometimes happens to a poet who has expended all his energy on
a poetic invention: they grew jealous of man. Ay, what is worse,
they feared that he would not willingly bow under their yoke;
they feared, though with small reason, that he might cause their
very heaven to totter. Thus they had raised up a power they
scarcely held themselves able to curb. Then there was anxiety
and alarm in the council of the gods. Much had they lavished in
their generosity on the creation of man; but all must be risked
now, for reason of bitter necessity; for all was at stake--so
the gods believed--and recalled he could not be, as a poet may
recall his invention. And by force he could not be subdued, or
else the gods themselves could have done so; but precisely of
that they despaired. He would have to be caught and subdued, then,
by a power weaker than his own and yet stronger--one strong
enough to compel him. What a marvelous power this would have to
be! However, necessity teaches even the gods to surpass themselves
in inventiveness. They sought and they found. That power was woman,
the marvel of creation, even in the eyes of the gods a greater
marvel than man--a discovery which the gods in their naïveté could
not help but applaud themselves for. What more can be said in her
praise than that she was able to accomplish what even the gods
did not believe themselves able to do; and what more can be said in
her praise than that she did accomplish it! But how marvelous
a creation must be hers to have accomplished it.

It was a ruse of the gods. Cunningly the enchantress was fashioned,
for no sooner had she bewitched man than she changed and caught him
in all the circumstantialities of existence. It was that the gods
had desired. But what, pray, can be more delicious, or more entrancing
and bewitching, than what the gods themselves contrived, when battling
for their supremacy, as the only means of luring man? And most
assuredly it is so, for woman is the only, and the most seductive,
power in heaven and on earth. When compared with her in this sense
man will indeed be found to be exceedingly imperfect.

And the stratagem of the gods was crowned with success; but not
always. There have existed at all times some men--a few--who
have detected the deception. They perceive well enough woman's
loveliness--more keenly, indeed than the others--but they also
suspect the real state of affairs. I call them erotic natures and
count myself among them. Men call them seducers, woman has no name
for them--such persons are to her unnameable. These erotic natures
are the truly fortunate ones. They live more luxuriously than do
the very gods, for they regale themselves with food more delectable
than ambrosia, and they drink what is more delicious than nectar;
they eat the most seductive invention of the gods' most ingenious
thought, they are ever eating dainties set for a bait--ah, incomparable
delight, ah, blissful fare--they are ever eating but the dainties
set for a bait; and they are never caught. All other men greedily
seize and devour it, like bumpkins eating their cabbage, and are
caught. Only the erotic nature fully appreciates the dainties set
out for bait--he prizes them infinitely. Woman divines this, and
for that reason there is a secret understanding between him and her.
But he knows also that she is a bait, and that secret he keeps
to himself.

That nothing more marvelous, nothing more delicious, nothing more
seductive, than woman can be devised, for that vouch the gods and
their pressing need which heightened their powers of invention;
for that vouches also the fact that they risked all, and in shaping
her moved heaven and earth.

I now forsake the myth. The conception "man" corresponds to his
"idea." I can therefore, if necessary, think of an individual man
as existing. The idea of woman, on the other hand, is so general
that no one single woman is able to express it completely. She is
not contemporaneous with man (and hence of less noble origin), but
a later creation, though more perfect than he. Whether now the gods
took some part from him whilst he slept, from fear of waking him by
taking too much; or whether they bisected him and made woman out
of the one half--at any rate it was man who was partitioned. Hence
she is the equal of man only after this partition. She is a
delusion and a snarer, but is so only afterwards, and for him who
is deluded. She is finiteness incarnate; but in her first stage
she is finiteness raised to the highest degree in the deceptive
infinitude of all divine and human illusions. Now, the deception
does not exist--one instant longer, and one is deceived.

She is finiteness, and as such she is a collective: one woman
represents all women. Only the erotic nature comprehends this and
therefore knows how to love many without ever being deceived, sipping
the while all the delights the cunning gods were able to prepare.
For this reason, as I said, woman cannot be fully expressed by one
formula, but is, rather, an infinitude of finalities. He who wishes
to think her "idea" will have the same experience as he who gazes
on a sea of nebulous shapes which ever form anew, or as he who is
dazed by looking over the waves whose foamy crests ever mock one's
vision; for her "idea" is but the workshop of possibilities. And to
the erotic nature these possibilities are the everlasting reason
for his worship.

So the gods created her delicate and ethereal as if out of
the mists of the summer night, yet goodly like ripe fruit;
light like a bird, though the repository of what attracts all
the world--light because the play of the forces is harmoniously
balanced in the invisible center of a negative relation;[54]
slender in growth, with definite lines, yet her body sinuous
with beautiful curves; perfect, yet ever appearing  as if completed
but now; cool, delicious, and refreshing like new-fallen snow,
yet blushing in coy transparency; happy like some pleasantry
which makes one forget all one's sorrow; soothing as being the
end of desire, and satisfying in herself being the stimulus of
desire. And the gods had calculated that man, when first beholding
her, would be amazed, as one who sees himself, though familiar with
that sight--would stand in amaze as one who sees himself in the
splendor of perfection--would stand in amaze as one who beholds
what he did never dream he would, yet beholds what, it would seem,
ought to have occurred to him before--sees what is essential to
life and yet gazes on it as being the very mystery of existence.
It is precisely tins contradiction in his admiration which nurses
desire to life, while this same admiration urges him ever nearer,
so that he cannot desist from gazing, cannot desist from believing
himself familiar with the sight, without really daring to approach,
even though he cannot desist from desiring.

When the gods had thus planned her form they were seized with
fear lest they might not have the wherewithal to give it existence;
but what they feared even more was herself. For they dared not
let her know how beautiful she was, apprehensive of having some
one in the secret who might spoil their ruse. Then was the crowning
touch given to their wondrous creation: they made her faultless;
but they concealed all this from her in the nescience of her
innocence, and concealed it doubly from her in the impenetrable
mystery of her modesty. Now she was perfect, and victory certain.
Inviting she had been before, but now doubly so through her shyness,
and beseeching through her shrinking, and irresistible through
herself offering resistance. The gods were jubilant. And no
allurement has ever been devised in the world so great as is woman,
and no allurement is as compelling as is innocence, and no temptation
is as ensnaring as is modesty, and no deception is as matchless as
is woman. She knows of nothing, still her modesty is instinctive
divination. She is distinct from man, and the separating wall of
modesty parting them is more decisive than Aladdin's sword separating
him from Gulnare;[55] and yet, when like Pyramis he puts his head
to this dividing wall of modesty, the erotic nature will perceive
all pleasures of desire divined within as from afar.

Thus does woman tempt. Men are wont to set forth the most precious
things they possess as a delectation for the gods, nothing less
will do. Thus is woman a show-bread, the gods knew of naught
comparable to her. She exists, she is present, she is with us,
close by; and yet she is removed from us to an infinite distance
when concealed in her modesty--until she herself betrays her
hiding place, she knows not how: it is not she herself, it is
life which informs on her. Roguish she is like a child who in
playing peeps forth from his hiding place, yet her roguishness
is inexplicable, for she does not know of it herself, she is
ever mysterious--mysterious when she casts down her eyes, mysterious
when she sends forth the messengers of her glance which no thought,
let alone any word, is able to follow. And yet is the eye the
"interpreter" of the soul! What, then, is the explanation of this
mystery if the interpreter too is unintelligible? Calm she is like
the hushed stillness of eventide, when not a leaf stirs; calm
like a consciousness as yet unaware of aught. Her heart-beats
are as regular as if life were not present; and yet the erotic
nature, listening with his stethoscopically practiced ear, detects
the dithyrambic pulsing of desire sounding along unbeknown.
Careless she is like the blowing of the wind, content like the
profound ocean, and yet full of longing like a thing biding
its explanation. My friends! My mind is softened, indescribably
softened. I comprehend that also my life expresses an idea, even
if you do not comprehend me. I too have discovered the secret
of existence; I too serve a divine idea--and, assuredly, I do
not serve it for nothing. If woman is a ruse of the gods, this
means that she is to be seduced; and if woman is not an "idea,"
the true inference is that the erotic nature wishes to love as
many of them as possible.

What luxury it is to relish the ruse without being duped, only
the erotic nature comprehends. And how blissful it is to be
seduced, woman alone knows. I know that from woman, even though
I never yet allowed any one of them time to explain it to me,
but re-asserted my independence, serving the idea by a break
as sudden as that caused by death; for a bride and a break are
to one another like female and male.[56] Only woman is aware
of this, and she is aware of it together with her seducer. No
married man will ever grasp this. Nor does she ever speak with
him about it. She resigns herself to her fate, she knows that
it must be so and that she can be seduced only once. For this
reason she never really bears malice against the man who seduced
her. That is to say, if he really did seduce her and thus expressed
the idea. Broken marriage vows and that kind of thing is, of
course, nonsense and no seduction. Indeed, it is by no means so
great a misfortune for a woman to be seduced. In fact, it is
a piece of good fortune for her. An excellently seduced girl
may make an excellent wife. If I myself were not fit to be a
seducer--however deeply I feel my inferior qualifications in
this respect--if I chose to be a married man, I should always
choose a girl already seduced, so that I would not have to begin
my marriage by seducing my wife. Marriage, to be sure, also
expresses an idea; but in relation to the idea of marriage that
quality is altogether immaterial which is the absolutely essential
condition for my idea. Therefore, a marriage ought never to be
planned to begin as though it were the beginning of a story of
seduction. So much is sure: there is a seducer for every woman.
Happy is she whose good fortune it is to meet just him.

Through marriage, on the other hand, the gods win their victory.
In it the once seduced maiden walks through life by the side of
her husband, looking back at times, full of longing, resigned
to her fate, until she reaches the goal of life. She dies; but
not in the same sense as man dies. She is volatilized and resolved
into that mysterious primal element of which the gods formed her--she
disappears like a dream, like an impermanent shape whose hour
is past. For what is woman but a dream, and the highest reality
withal! Thus does the erotic nature comprehend her, leading her,
and being led by her in the moment of seduction, beyond time--where
she has her true existence, being an illusion. Through her husband,
on the other hand, she becomes a creature of this world, and he
through her.

Marvelous nature! If I did not admire thee, a woman would teach
me; for truly she is the _venerabile_ of life. Splendidly didst
thou fashion her, but more splendidly still in that thou never
didst fashion one woman like another. In man, the essential is the
essential, and insofar always alike; but in woman the adventitious
is the essential, and is thus an inexhaustible source of differences.
Brief is her splendor; but quickly the pain is forgotten, too, when
the same splendor is proffered me anew. It is true, I too am aware
of the unbeautiful which may appear in her thereafter; but she is
not thus with her seducer.


They rose from the table. It needed but a hint from Constantin,
for the participants understood each other with military precision
whenever there was a question of face or turn about. With his
invisible baton of command, elastic like a divining rod in his hand,
Constantin once more touched them in order to call forth in them a
fleeting reminiscence of the banquet and the spirit of enjoyment
which had prevailed before but was now, in some measure, submerged
through the intellectual effort of the speeches--in order that the
note of glad festivity which had disappeared might, by way of
resonance, return once more among the guests in a brief moment of
recollection. He saluted with his full glass as a signal of parting,
emptying it, and then flinging it against the door in the rear wall.
The others followed his example, consummating this symbolic
action with all the solemnity of adepts. Justice was thus done
the pleasure of stopping short--that royal pleasure which, though
briefer, yet is more liberating than any other pleasure. With a
libation this pleasure ought to be entered upon, with the libation
of flinging one's glass into destruction and oblivion, and tearing
one's self passionately away from every memory, as if it were a
danger to one's life: this libation is to the gods of the nether
world. One breaks off, and strength is needed to do that, greater
strength than to sever a knot by a sword-blow; for the difficulty
of the knot tends to arouse one's passion, but the passion required
for breaking off must be of one's own making. In a superficial
sense the result is, of course, the same; but from an artistic
point of view there is a world of difference between something
ceasing or simply coming to an end, and it being broken off by
one's own free will--whether it is a mere occurrence or a passionate
decision; whether it is all over, like a school song, because
there is no more to it, or whether it is terminated by the Cæsarian
operation of one's own pleasure; whether it is a triviality every
one has experienced, or the secret which escapes most.

Constantin's flinging his beaker against the door was intended
merely as a symbolic rite; nevertheless, his so doing was, in
a way, a decisive act; for when the last glass was shattered the
door opened, and just as he who presumptuously knocked at Death's
door and, on its opening, beheld the powers of annihilation, so
the banqueters beheld the corps of destruction ready to demolish
everything--a memento which in an instant put them to flight
from that place, while at the very same moment the entire surroundings
had been reduced to the semblance of ruin.

A carriage stood ready at the door. At Constantin's invitation
they seated themselves in it and drove away in good spirits;
for that tableau of destruction which they left behind had given
their souls fresh elasticity. After having covered a distance of
several miles a halt was made. Here Constantin took his leave as
host, informing them that five carriages were at their disposal--each
one was free to suit his own pleasure and drive wherever he wanted,
whether alone or in company with whomsoever he pleased. Thus a
rocket, propelled by the force of the powder, ascends at a single
shot, remains collected for an instant, in order then to spread out
to all the winds.

While the horses were being hitched to the carriages the nocturnal
banqueters strolled a little way down the road. The fresh air of
the morning purified their hot blood with its coolness, and they
gave themselves up to it entirely. Their forms, and the groups in
which they ranged themselves, made a fantastic impression on me.
For when the morning sun shines on field and meadow, and on every
creature which in the night found rest and strength to rise up
jubilating with the sun--in this there is only a pleasing, mutual
understanding; but a nightly company, viewed by the morning light
and in smiling surroundings, makes a downright uncanny impression.
It makes one think of spooks which have been surprised by daylight,
of subterranean spirits which are unable to regain the crevice
through which they may vanish, because it is visible only in the
dark; of unhappy creatures in whom the difference between day and
night has become obliterated through the monotony of their sufferings.

A foot path led them through a small patch of field toward a garden
surrounded by a hedge, from behind whose concealment a modest
summer-cottage peeped forth. At the end of the garden, toward the
field, there was an arbor formed by trees. Becoming aware of people
being in the arbor, they all grew curious, and with the spying
glances of men bent on observation, the besiegers closed in about
that pleasant place of concealment, hiding themselves, and as eager
as emissaries of the police about to take some one by surprise.
Like emissaries of the police--well, to be sure, their appearance
made the misunderstanding possible that it was they whom the minions
of the law might be looking for. Each one had occupied a point of
vantage for peeping in, when Victor drew back a step and said to
his neighbor, "Why, dear me, if that is not Judge William and his
wife!"

They were surprised--not the two whom the foliage concealed
and who were all too deeply concerned with their domestic enjoyment
to be observers. They felt themselves too secure to believe
themselves an object of any one's observation excepting the
morning sun's which took pleasure in looking in to them, whilst
a gentle zephyr moved the boughs above them, and the repose-fulness
of the countryside, as well as all things around them girded the
little arbor about with peace. The happy married couple was not
surprised and noticed nothing. That they were a married couple was
clear enough; one could perceive that at a glance--alas! if one is
something of an observer one's self. Even if nothing in the wide
world, nothing, whether overtly or covertly, if nothing, I say,
threatens to interfere with the happiness of lovers, yet they
are not thus secure when sitting together. They are in a state
of bliss; and yet it is as if there were some power bent on
separating them, so firmly they clasp one another; and yet it
is as if there were some enemy present against whom they must
defend themselves; and yet it is as if they could never become
sufficiently reassured. Not thus married people, and not thus
that married couple in the arbor. How long they had been married,
however, that was not to be determined with certainty. To be
sure, the wife's activity at the tea-table revealed a sureness
of hand born of practice, but at the same time such almost childlike
interest in her occupation as if she were a newly married woman
and in that middle condition when she is not, as yet, sure whether
marriage is fun or earnest, whether being a housewife is a calling,
or a game, or a pastime. Perhaps she had been married for some
longer time but did not generally preside at the tea-table, or
perhaps did so only out here in the country, or did it perhaps
only that morning which, possibly, had a special significance
for them. Who could tell? All calculation is frustrated to a
certain degree by the fact that every personality exhibits some
originality which keeps time from leaving its marks. When the
sun shines in all his summer glory one thinks straightway that
there must be some festal occasion at hand--that it cannot be
so for every-day use, or that it is the first time, or at least
one of the first times; for surely, one thinks, it cannot be
repeated for any length of time. Thus would think he who saw
it but once, or saw it for the first time; and I saw the wife
of the justice for the first time. He who sees the object in
question every day may think differently; provided he sees the
same thing. But let the judge decide about that!

As I remarked, our amiable housewife was occupied. She poured
boiling water into the cups, probably to warm them, emptied them
again, set a cup on a platter, poured the tea and served it with
sugar and cream--now all was ready; was it fun or earnest? In
case a person did not relish tea at other times--he should have
sat in the judge's place; for just then that drink seemed most
inviting to me, only the inviting air of the lovely woman herself
seemed to me more inviting.

It appeared that she had not had time to speak until then. Now
she broke the silence and said, while serving him his tea: "Quick,
now, dear, and drink while it is hot, the morning air is quite
cool, anyway; and surely the least I can do for you is to be a
little careful of you. The least?" the judge answered laconically.
"Yes, or the most, or the only thing." The judge looked at her
inquiringly, and whilst he was helping himself she continued: "You
interrupted me yesterday when I wished to broach the subject, but
I have thought about it again; many times I have thought about
it, and now particularly, you know yourself in reference to
whom: it is certainly true that if you hadn't married, you would
have been far more successful in your career." With his cup still
on the platter the judge sipped a first mouthful with visible
enjoyment, thoroughly refreshed; or was it perchance the joy
over his lovely wife; I for my part believe it was the latter.
She, however, seemed only to be glad that it tasted so good to
him. Then he put down his cup on the table at his side, took out
a cigar, and said: "May I light it at your chafing-dish"? "Certainly,"
she said, and handed him a live coal on a tea-spoon. He lit his
cigar and put his arm about her waist whilst she leaned against
his shoulder. He turned his head the other way to blow out the
smoke, and then he let his eyes rest on her with a devotion such
as only a glance can reveal; yet he smiled, but this glad smile
had in it a dash of sad irony. Finally he said: "Do you really
believe so, my girl? What do you mean?" she answered. He was
silent again, his smile gained the upper hand, but his voice
remained quite serious, nevertheless. "Then I pardon you your
previous folly, seeing that you yourself have forgotten it so
quickly; thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh[57]--what
great career should I have had?" His wife seemed embarrassed
for a moment by this return, but collected her wits quickly and
now explained her meaning with womanly eloquence. The judge
looked down before him, without interrupting her; but as she
continued he began to drum on the table with the fingers of his
right hand, at the same time humming a tune. The words of the
song were audible for a moment, just as the pattern of a texture
now becomes visible, now disappears again; and then again they
were heard no longer as he hummed the tune of the song: "The
goodman he went to the forest, to cut the wands so white." After
this melodramatic performance, consisting in the justice's wife
explaining herself whilst he hummed his tune, the dialogue set
in again. "I am thinking," he remarked, "I am thinking you are
ignorant of the fact that the Danish Law permits a man to castigate
his wife[58]--a pity only that the law does not indicate on
which occasions it is permitted." His wife smiled at his threat
and continued: "Now why can I never get you to be serious when
I touch on this matter? You do not understand me: believe me, I
mean it sincerely, it seems to me a very beautiful thought. Of
course, if you weren't my husband I would not dare to entertain
it; but now I have done so, for your sake and for my sake; and
now be nice and serious, for my sake, and answer me frankly."
"No, you can't get me to be serious, and a serious answer you
won't get; I must either laugh at you, or make you forget it, as
before, or beat you; or else you must stop talking about it, or I
shall have to make you keep silent about it some other way. You
see, it is a joke, and that is why there are so many ways out."
He arose, pressed a kiss on her brow, laid her arm in his, and
then disappeared in a leafy walk which led from the arbor.


The arbor was empty; there was nothing else to do, so the hostile
corps of occupation withdrew without making any gains. Still, the
others were content with uttering some malicious remarks. The
company returned but missed Victor. He had rounded the corner
and, in walking along the garden, had come up to the country
home. The doors of a garden-room facing the lawn were open, and
likewise a window. Very probably he had seen something which
attracted his attention. He leapt into the window, and leapt
out again just as the party were approaching, for they had been
looking for him. Triumphantly he held up some papers in his hand
and exclaimed: "One of the judge's manuscripts![59] Seeing
that I edited his other works it is no more than my duty that
I should edit this one too." He put it into his pocket; or,
rather, he was about to do so; for as he was bending his arm
and already had his hand with the manuscript half-way down in
his pocket I managed to steal it from him.

But who, then, am I? Let no one ask! If it hasn't occurred to you
before to ask about it I am over the difficulty; for now the worst
is behind me. For that matter, I am not worth asking about, for
I am the least of all things, people would put me in utter confusion
by asking about me. I am pure existence, and therefore smaller,
almost, than nothing. I am "pure existence" which is present
everywhere but still is never noticed; for I am ever vanishing.
I am like the line above which stands the summa summarum--who
cares about the line? By my own strength I can accomplish nothing,
for even the idea to steal the manuscript from Victor was not my
own idea; for this very idea which, as a thief would say, induced
me to "borrow" the manuscript, was borrowed from him. And now,
when editing this manuscript, I am, again, nothing at all; for
it rightly belongs to the judge. And as editor, I am in my nothingness
only a kind of nemesis on Victor, who imagined that he had the
prescriptive right to do so.


[Footnote 1: _Cf._ Luke XIV, 19-20.]

[Footnote 2: Words used in the banns.]

[Footnote 3: Which in Latin means both "from the temple" and "at once."]

[Footnote 4: The omission of the negative particle in the original is
no doubt unintentional.]

[Footnote 5: Pious wish.]

[Footnote 6: Kings 20, 1; Isaiah 38, 1.]

[Footnote 7: An allusion to the plight of Aristophanes in Plato's
_Symposion._]

[Footnote 8: Haggai 1, 6 (inexact).]

[Footnote 9: May it be fortunate and favorable.]

[Footnote 10: _Symposion_, ch. 9.]

[Footnote 11: This ironic sally refers, not to Descartes' principle
of skepsis, but to the numerous Danish followers of Hegel and his
"method"; _cf._ Fear and Trembling.]

[Footnote 12: _Symposion_, ch. 24.]

[Footnote 13: _Ibid._, ch. 15-16.]

[Footnote 14: _Cf._ Matthew 13, 31 etc.]

[Footnote 15: A quotation from Musæus, _Volksmärchen der Deutschen_,
III, 219.]

[Footnote 16: The reference is to a situation in Richard Cumberland's
(1732-1811) play of  "The Jew," known to Copenhagen playgoers in an
adaptation.]

[Footnote 17: I relate what I have been told.]

[Footnote 18: A character in the Danish playwright Overskou's vaudeville
of "Capriciosa" (Comedies III, 184).]

[Footnote 19: The glutton in Oehlenschlœger's vaudeville of
"Sovedrikken."]

[Footnote 20: Supplied by the translator to complete the sense.]

[Footnote 21: Dejection. _Cf._ the maxim: _omne animal post coïtun
triste._]

[Footnote 22: This statement is to be found, rather, in Aristotle's
Ethics II, 6.]

[Footnote 23: There is a pun here in the original.]

[Footnote 24: In Holberg's comedy of "Erasmus Montanus," III, 6.]

[Footnote 25: _Cf._ "The Banquet."]

[Footnote 26: "Eccles, 3, 7."]

[Footnote 27: "Comical power."]

[Footnote 28: "In uncertain battle."]

[Footnote 29: According to the development of these terms in Kierkegaard's
previous works, the "absolute" belongs to the ethic, the "relative"
to the æsthetic sphere.]

[Footnote 30: Heroine of Mozart's "Don Juan."]

[Footnote 31: Quotation from Wessel's famous comedy of "Love without
Stockings," III, 3.]

[Footnote 32: Viz besides the eggs she duly furnishes; Holberg, "The
Busy-body," II, 1.]

[Footnote 33: This figure is said by Diogenes Lærtios II, 37 to have
been used by Socrates himself about his relation to Xanthippe.]

[Footnote 34: The following sentences are not as clear in meaning as
is otherwise the case in Kierkegaard.]

[Footnote 35: Poetics, chap. 15.]

[Footnote 36: _Cf._ "The Banquet"]

[Footnote 37: They are, that he had been created a man and not an
animal, a man and not a woman, a Greek and not a Barbarian (Lactantius,
Instit. III, 19, 17).]

[Footnote 38: Thales of Miletos (Diogenes Lærtios I, 33).]

[Footnote 39: German poet of the Romantic School (1773-1853).]

[Footnote 40: Reasoning against the rules of logic.]

[Footnote 41: "The Lying-in Room," II, 2.]

[Footnote 42: A quotation from Oehlenschläager's "Aladdin."]

[Footnote 43: Scattered members.]

[Footnote 44: See Diogenes Lærtios, VI, 37.]

[Footnote 45: By the immortal gods.]

[Footnote 46: I adjure you by the gods.]

[Footnote 47: Therefore those tears.]

[Footnote 48: I concede.]

[Footnote 49: It can hardly be seen, it is but for lips which
understand each other exactly.]

[Footnote 50: Christiansfeld, a town in South Jutland, was the
seat of a colony of Herrhutian Pietists.]

[Footnote 51: The reference is to the "Diary of the Seducer"
(in "Either-Or," part I). Edward is the scorned lover of Cordelia
who is seduced by John.]

[Footnote 52: I concede. I have conceded.]

[Footnote 53: Reference to a comedy by Farquhar, which enjoyed a
moderate popularity in Copenhagen.]

[Footnote 54: i.e., evidently, she docs not exist because of herself;
hence she is in a "negative" relation to herself. The center of this
relation is "what attracts all the world."]

[Footnote 55: In Oehlenschläger's "Aladdin."]

[Footnote 56: In the Danish, a pun on the homonyms _en brud_ and _et
brud._]

[Footnote 57: Job 2, 10.]

[Footnote 58: According to the Jutland Laws (A. D. 1241) a man is
permitted to punish his wife, when she has misbehaved, with stick and
with rod, but not with weapon. In the Danish Law (1683) this right is
restricted to children and servants. S. V.]

[Footnote 59: Containing the second part of "Stages on Life's Road,"
entitled "Reflections on Marriage in Refutation of Objections."]




FEAR AND TREMBLING




INTRODUCTION II


Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas
our age has arranged a regular clearance-sale. Everything may be
had at such absurdly low prices that very soon the question will
arise whether any one cares to bid. Every waiter with a speculative
turn who carefully marks the significant progress of modern
philosophy, every lecturer in philosophy, every tutor, student,
every sticker-and-quitter of philosophy--they are not content with
doubting everything, but "go right on." It might, possibly, be
ill-timed and inopportune to ask them whither they are bound; but
it is no doubt polite and modest to take it for granted that they
have doubted everything--else it were a curious statement for them
to make, that they were proceeding onward. So they have, all of
them, completed that preliminary operation and, it would seem, with
such ease that they do not think it necessary to waste a word about
how they did it. The fact is, not even he who looked anxiously and
with a troubled spirit for some little point of information, ever
found one, nor any instruction, nor even any little dietetic
prescription, as to how one is to accomplish this enormous task.
"But did not Descartes proceed in this fashion?" Descartes, indeed!
that venerable, humble, honest thinker whose writings surely no
one can read without deep emotion--Descartes did what he said,
and said what he did. Alas, alas! that is a mighty rare thing
in our times! But Descartes, as he says frequently enough, never
uttered doubts concerning his faith....

In our times, as was remarked, no one is content with faith,
but "goes right on." The question as to whither they are proceeding
may be a silly question; whereas it is a sign of urbanity and
culture to assume that every one has faith, to begin with, for
else it were a curious statement for them to make, that they are
proceeding further. In the olden days it was different. Then,
faith was a task for a whole life-time because it was held that
proficiency in faith was not to be won within a few days or weeks.
Hence, when the tried patriarch felt his end approaching, after
having fought his battles and preserved his faith, he was still
young enough at heart not to have forgotten the fear and trembling
which disciplined his youth and which the mature man has under
control, but which no one entirely outgrows--except insofar as
he succeeds in "going on" as early as possible. The goal which
those venerable men reached at last--at that spot every one
starts, in our times, in order to "proceed further."...




PREPARATION


There lived a man who, when a child, had heard the beautiful Bible
story of how God tempted Abraham and how he stood the test, how
he maintained his faith and, against his expectations, received
his son back again. As this man grew older he read this same story
with ever greater admiration; for now life had separated what had
been united in the reverent simplicity of the child. And the older
he grew, the more frequently his thoughts reverted to that story.
His enthusiasm waxed stronger and stronger, and yet the story grew
less and less clear to him. Finally he forgot everything else in
thinking about it, and his soul contained but one wish, which was,
to behold Abraham: and but one longing, which was, to have been
witness to that event. His desire was, not to see the beautiful
lands of the Orient, and not the splendor of the Promised Land,
and not the reverent couple whose old age the Lord had blessed
with children, and not the venerable figure of the aged patriarch,
and not the god-given vigorous youth of Isaac--it would have been
the same to him if the event had come to pass on some barren
heath. But his wish was, to have been with Abraham on the three
days' journey, when he rode with sorrow before him and with Isaac
at his side. His wish was, to have been present at the moment when
Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw Mount Moriah afar off; to have
been present at the moment when he left his asses behind and wended
his way up to the mountain alone with Isaac. For the mind of this
man was busy, not with the delicate conceits of the imagination,
but rather with his shuddering thought.

The man we speak of was no thinker, he felt no desire to go beyond
his faith: it seemed to him the most glorious fate to be remembered
as the Father of Faith, and a most enviable lot to be possessed of
that faith, even if no one knew it.

The man we speak of was no learned exegetist, he did not even
understand Hebrew--who knows but a knowledge of Hebrew might have
helped him to understand readily both the story and Abraham.




I


And God tempted Abraham and said unto him: take Isaac, thine
only son, whom thou lovest and go to the land Moriah and sacrifice
him there on a mountain which I shall show thee.[1]

It was in the early morning, Abraham arose betimes and had his
asses saddled. He departed from his tent, and Isaac with him;
but Sarah looked out of the window after them until they were
out of sight. Silently they rode for three days; but on the fourth
morning Abraham said not a word but lifted up his eyes and beheld
Mount Moriah in the distance. He left his servants behind and,
leading Isaac by the hand, he approached the mountain. But Abraham
said to himself: "I shall surely conceal from Isaac whither he is
going." He stood still, he laid his hand on Isaac's head to bless
him, and Isaac bowed down to receive his blessing. And Abraham's
aspect was fatherly, his glance was mild, his speech admonishing.
But Isaac understood him not, his soul would not rise to him; he
embraced Abraham's knees, he besought him at his feet, he begged
for his young life, for his beautiful hopes, he recalled the joy
in Abraham's house when he was born, he reminded him of the sorrow
and the loneliness that would be after him. Then did Abraham raise
up the youth and lead him by his hand, and his words were full of
consolation and admonishment. But Isaac understood him not. He
ascended Mount Moriah, but Isaac understood him not. Then Abraham
averted his face for a moment; but when Isaac looked again, his
father's countenance was changed, his glance wild, his aspect
terrible, he seized Isaac and threw him to the ground and said:
"Thou foolish lad, believest thou I am thy father? An idol-worshipper
am I. Believest thou it is God's command? Nay, but my pleasure."
Then Isaac trembled and cried out in his fear: "God in heaven,
have pity on me, God of Abraham, show mercy to me, I have no
father on earth, be thou then my father!" But Abraham said softly
to himself: "Father in heaven, I thank thee. Better is it that
he believes me inhuman than that he should lose his faith in thee."


When the child is to be weaned, his mother blackens her breast;
for it were a pity if her breast should look sweet to him when he
is not to have it. Then the child believes that her breast has
changed; but his mother is ever the same, her glance is full of love
and as tender as ever. Happy he who needed not worse means to wean
his child!




II


It was in the early morning. Abraham arose betimes and embraced
Sarah, the bride of his old age. And Sarah kissed Isaac who had
taken the shame from her--Isaac, her pride, her hope for all
coming generations. Then the twain rode silently along their way,
and Abraham's glance was fastened on the ground before him; until
on the fourth day, when he lifted up his eyes and beheld Mount
Moriah in the distance; but then his eyes again sought the ground.
Without a word he put the fagots in order and bound Isaac, and
without a word he unsheathed his knife. Then he beheld the ram God
had chosen, and sacrificed him, and wended his way home.... From
that day on Abraham, grew old. He could not forget that God had
required this of him. Isaac flourished as before; but Abraham's
eye was darkened, he saw happiness no more.


When the child has grown and is to be weaned, his mother will in
maidenly fashion conceal her breast. Then the child has a mother
no longer. Happy the child who lost not his mother in any other sense!




III


It was in the early morning. Abraham arose betimes; he kissed Sarah,
the young mother, and Sarah kissed Isaac, her joy, her delight for
all times. And Abraham rode on his way, lost in thought--he was
thinking of Hagar and her son whom he had driven out into the
wilderness. He ascended Mount Moriah and he drew the knife.

It was a calm evening when Abraham rode out alone, and he rode to
Mount Moriah. There he cast himself down on his face and prayed to
God to forgive him his sin in that he had been about to sacrifice
his son Isaac, and in that the father had forgotten his duty toward
his son. And yet oftener he rode on his lonely way, but he found
no rest. He could not grasp that it was a sin that he had wanted to
sacrifice to God his most precious possession, him for whom he would
most gladly have died many times. But, if it was a sin, if he had
not loved Isaac thus, then could he not grasp the possibility that
he could be forgiven: for what sin more terrible?


When the child is to be weaned, the mother is not without sorrow
that she and her child are to be separated more and more, that the
child who had first lain under her heart, and afterwards at any
rate rested at her breast, is to be so near to her no more. So
they sorrow together for that brief while. Happy he who kept his
child so near to him and needed not to sorrow more!




IV


It was in the early morning. All was ready for the journey in
the house of Abraham. He bade farewell to Sarah; and Eliezer,
his faithful servant, accompanied him along the way for a little
while. They rode together in peace, Abraham and Isaac, until
they came to Mount Moriah. And Abraham prepared everything for
the sacrifice, calmly and mildly; but when his father turned
aside in order to unsheathe his knife, Isaac saw that Abraham's
left hand was knit in despair and that a trembling shook his
frame--but Abraham drew forth the knife.

Then they returned home again, and Sarah hastened to meet them;
but Isaac had lost his faith. No one in all the world ever said
a word about this, nor did Isaac speak to any man concerning
what he had seen, and Abraham suspected not that any one had seen it.


When the child is to be weaned, his mother has the stronger food
ready lest the child perish. Happy he who has in readiness this
stronger food!


Thus, and in many similar ways, thought the man whom I have mentioned
about this event. And every time he returned, after a pilgrimage to
Mount Moriah, he sank down in weariness, folding his hands and saying:
"No one, in truth, was great as was Abraham, and who can understand
him?"




A PANEGYRIC ON ABRAHAM


If a consciousness of the eternal were not implanted in man; if
the basis of all that exists were but a confusedly fermenting
element which, convulsed by obscure passions, produced all, both
the great and the insignificant; if under everything there lay
a bottomless void never to be filled--what else were life but
despair? If it were thus, and if there were no sacred bonds
between man and man; if one generation arose after another, as
in the forest the leaves of one season succeed the leaves of
another, or like the songs of birds which are taken up one after
another; if the generations of man passed through the world like
a ship passing through the sea and the wind over the desert--a
fruitless and a vain thing; if eternal oblivion were ever greedily
watching for its prey and there existed no power strong enough to
wrest it from its clutches--how empty were life then, and how
dismal! And therefore it is not thus; but, just as God created
man and woman, he likewise called into being the hero and the
poet or orator. The latter cannot perform the deeds of the hero--he
can only admire and love him and rejoice in him. And yet he
also is happy and not less so; for the hero is, as it were, his
better self with which he has fallen in love, and he is glad he
is not himself the hero, so that his love can express itself in
admiration.

The poet is the genius of memory, and does nothing but recall
what has been done, can do nothing but admire what has been
done. He adds nothing of his own, but he is jealous of what
has been entrusted to him. He obeys the choice of his own heart;
but once he has found what he has been seeking, he visits every
man's door with his song and with his speech, so that all may
admire the hero as he does, and be proud of the hero as he is.
This is his achievement, his humble work, this is his faithful
service in the house of the hero. If thus, faithful to his love,
he battles day and night against the guile of oblivion which
wishes to lure the hero from him, then has he accomplished his
task, then is he gathered to his hero who loves him as faithfully;
for the poet is at it were the hero's better self, unsubstantial,
to be sure, like a mere memory, but also transfigured as is a
memory. Therefore shall no one be forgotten who has done great
deeds; and even if there be delay, even if the cloud of misunderstanding
obscure the hero from our vision, still his lover will come some
time; and the more time has passed, the more faithfully will he
cleave to him.

No, no one shall be forgotten who was great in this world. But
each hero was great in his own way, and each one was eminent in
proportion to the great things he loved. For he who loved himself
became great through himself, and he who loved others became great
through his devotion, but he who loved God became greater than
all of these. Everyone of them shall be remembered, but each one
became great in proportion to his trust. One became great by hoping
for the possible; another, by hoping for the eternal; but he who
hoped for the impossible, he became greater than all of these.
Every one shall be remembered; but each one was great in proportion
to the power with which he strove. For he who strove with the
world became great by overcoming himself; but he who strove with
God, he became the greatest of them all. Thus there have been
struggles in the world, man against man, one against a thousand;
but he who struggled with God, he became greatest of them all.
Thus there was fighting on this earth, and there was he who conquered
everything by his strength, and there was he who conquered God by
his weakness. There was he who, trusting in himself, gained all;
and there was he who, trusting in his strength sacrificed everything;
but he who believed in God was greater than all of these. There was
he who was great through his strength, and he who was great through
his wisdom, and he who was great through his hopes, and he who was
great through his love; but Abraham was greater than all of
these--great through the strength whose power is weakness, great
through the wisdom whose secret is folly, great through the hope
whose expression is madness, great through the love which is hatred
of one's self.

Through the urging of his faith Abraham left the land of his
forefathers and became a stranger in the land of promise. Ke left
one thing behind and took one thing along: he left his worldly
wisdom behind and took with him faith. For else he would not have
left the land of his fathers, but would have thought it an unreasonable
demand. Through his faith he came to be a stranger in the land of
promise, where there was nothing to remind him of all that had been
dear to him, but where everything by its newness tempted his soul
to longing. And yet was he God's chosen, he in whom the Lord was
well pleased! Indeed, had he been one cast off, one thrust out of
God's mercy, then might he have comprehended it; but now it seemed
like a mockery of him and of his faith. There have been others who
lived in exile from the fatherland which they loved. They are not
forgotten, nor is the song of lament forgotten in which they
mournfully sought and found what they had lost. Of Abraham there
exists no song of lamentation. It is human to complain, it is
human to weep with the weeping; but it is greater to believe, and
more blessed to consider him who has faith.

Through his faith Abraham received the promise that in his seed
were to be blessed all races of mankind. Time passed, there was
still the possibility of it, and Abraham had faith. Another man
there was who also lived in hopes. Time passed, the evening of
his life was approaching; neither was he paltry enough to have
forgotten his hopes: neither shall he be forgotten by us! Then
he sorrowed, and his sorrow did not deceive him, as life had
done, but gave him all it could; for in the sweetness of sorrow
he became possessed of his disappointed hopes. It is human to
sorrow, it is human to sorrow with the sorrowing; but it is
greater to have faith, and more blessed to consider him who
has faith.

No song of lamentation has come down to us from Abraham. He did
not sadly count the days as time passed; he did not look at
Sarah with suspicious eyes, whether she was becoming old; he
did not stop the sun's course lest Sarah should grow old and
his hope with her; he did not lull her with his songs of lamentation.
Abraham grew old, and Sarah became a laughing-stock to the people;
and yet was he God's chosen, and heir to the promise that in his
seed were to be blessed all races of mankind. Were it, then,
not better if he had not been God's chosen? For what is it to
be God's chosen? Is it to have denied to one in one's youth all
the wishes of youth in order to have them fulfilled after great
labor in old age?

But Abraham had faith and steadfastly lived in hope. Had Abraham
been less firm in his trust, then would he have given up that hope.
He would have said to God: "So it is, perchance, not Thy will,
after all, that this shall come to pass. I shall surrender my
hope. It was my only one, it was my bliss. I am sincere, I conceal
no secret grudge for that Thou didst deny it to me." He would not
have remained forgotten, his example would have saved many a one;
but he would not have become the Father of Faith. For it is great
to surrender one's hope, but greater still to abide by it steadfastly
after having surrendered it; for it is great to seize hold of the
eternal hope, but greater still to abide steadfastly by one's worldly
hopes after having surrendered them.

Then came the fulness of time. If Abraham had not had faith, then
Sarah would probably have died of sorrow, and Abraham, dulled by
his grief, would not have understood the fulfillment, but would
have smiled about it as a dream of his youth. But Abraham had
faith, and therefore he remained young; for he who always hopes
for the best, him life will deceive, and he will grow old; and
he who is always prepared for the worst, he will soon age; but
he who has faith, he will preserve eternal youth. Praise, therefore,
be to this story! For Sarah, though advanced in age, was young
enough to wish for the pleasures of a mother, and Abraham, though
grey of hair, was young enough to wish to become a father. In a
superficial sense it may be considered miraculous that what they
wished for came to pass, but in a deeper sense the miracle of
faith is to be seen in Abraham's and Sarah's being young enough
to wish, and their faith having preserved their wish and therewith
their youth. The promise he had received was fulfilled, and he
accepted it in faith, and it came to pass according to the promise
and his faith; whereas Moses smote the rock with his staff but
believed not.

There was joy in Abraham's house when Sarah celebrated the day
of her Golden Wedding.

But it was not to remain thus; for once more was Abraham to be
tempted. He had struggled with that cunning power to which nothing
is impossible, with that ever watchful enemy who never sleeps,
with that old man who outlives all--he had struggled with Time
and had preserved his faith. And now all the terror of that fight
was concentrated in one moment. "And God tempted Abraham, saying to
him: take now thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get
thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt
offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee off.[2]"

All was lost, then, and more terribly than if a son had never
been given him! The Lord had only mocked Abraham, then! Miraculously
he had realized the unreasonable hopes of Abraham; and now he wished
to take away what he had given. A foolish hope it had been, but
Abraham had not laughed when the promise had been made him. Now
all was lost--the trusting hope of seventy years, the brief joy
at the fulfillment of his hopes. Who, then, is he that snatches
away the old man's staff, who that demands that he himself shall
break it in two? Who is he that renders disconsolate the grey hair
of old age, who is he that demands that he himself shall do it?
Is there no pity for the venerable old man, and none for the
innocent child? And yet was Abraham God's chosen one, and yet
was it the Lord that tempted him. And now all was to be lost!
The glorious remembrance of him by a whole race, the promise of
Abraham's seed--all that was but a whim, a passing fancy of the
Lord, which Abraham was now to destroy forever! That glorious
treasure, as old as the faith in Abraham's heart, and many, many
years older than Isaac, the fruit of Abraham's life, sanctified
by prayers, matured in struggles--the blessing on the lips of
Abraham: this fruit was now to be plucked before the appointed
time, and to remain without significance; for of what significance
were it if Isaac was to be sacrificed? That sad and yet blessed
hour when Abraham was to take leave from all that was dear to him,
the hour when he would once more lift up his venerable head,
when his face would shine like the countenance of the Lord, the
hour when he would collect his whole soul for a blessing strong
enough to render Isaac blessed all the days of his life--that
hour was not to come! He was to say farewell to Isaac, to be
sure, but in such wise that he himself was to remain behind;
death was to part them, but in such wise that Isaac was to die.
The old man was not in happiness to lay his hand on Isaac's head
when the hour of death came, but, tired of life, to lay violent
hands on Isaac. And it was God who tempted him. Woe, woe to the
messenger who would have come before Abraham with such a command!
Who would have dared to be the messenger of such dread tidings?
But it was God that tempted Abraham.

But Abraham had faith, and had faith for this life. Indeed, had
his faith been but concerning the life to come, then might he more
easily have cast away all, in order to hasten out of this world
which was not his....

But Abraham had faith and doubted not, but trusted that the
improbable would come to pass. If Abraham had doubted, then would
he have undertaken something else, something great and noble; for
what could Abraham have undertaken but was great and noble! He
would have proceeded to Mount Moriah, he would have cloven the
wood, and fired it, and unsheathed his knife--he would have cried
out to God: "Despise not this sacrifice; it is not, indeed, the
best I have; for what is an old man against a child foretold of
God; but it is the best I can give thee. Let Isaac never know
that he must find consolation in his youth." He would have plunged
the steel in his own breast. And he would have been admired
throughout the world, and his name would not have been forgotten;
but it is one thing to be admired and another, to be a lode-star
which guides one troubled in mind.

But Abraham had faith. He prayed not for mercy and that he might
prevail upon the Lord: it was only when just retribution was to
be visited upon Sodom and Gomorrha that Abraham ventured to beseech
Him for mercy.

We read in Scripture: "And God did tempt Abraham, and said unto
him, Abraham: and he said, Behold here I am.[3]" You, whom I
am now addressing did you do likewise? When you saw the dire
dispensations of Providence approach threateningly, did you not
then say to the mountains, Fall on me; and to the hills, Cover
me?[4] Or, if you were stronger in faith, did not your step
linger along the way, longing for the old accustomed paths, as
it were? And when the voice called you, did you answer, then, or
not at all, and if you did, perchance in a low voice, or whispering?
Not thus Abraham, but gladly and cheerfully and trustingly, and with
a resonant voice he made answer: "Here am I." And we read further:
"And Abraham rose up early in the morning.[5]" He made haste as
though for some joyous occasion, and early in the morning he was
in the appointed place, on Mount Moriah. He said nothing to Sarah,
nothing to Eliezer, his steward; for who would have understood him?
Did not his temptation by its very nature demand of him the vow of
silence? "He laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and
laid him on the altar upon the wood. And Abraham stretched forth
his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.[6]" My listener!
Many a father there has been who thought that with his child he
lost the dearest of all there was in the world for him; yet
assuredly no child ever was in that sense a pledge of God as
was Isaac to Abraham. Many a father there has been who lost his
child; but then it was God, the unchangeable and inscrutable
will of the Almighty and His hand which took it. Not thus with
Abraham. For him was reserved a more severe trial, and Isaac's
fate was put into Abraham's hand together with the knife. And
there he stood, the old man, with his only hope! Yet did he not
doubt, nor look anxiously to the left or right, nor challenge
Heaven with his prayers. He knew it was God the Almighty who
now put him to the test; he knew it was the greatest sacrifice
which could be demanded of him; but he knew also that no sacrifice
was too great which God demanded--and he drew forth his knife.

Who strengthened Abraham's arm, who supported his right arm that
it drooped not powerless? For he who contemplates this scene is
unnerved. Who strengthened Abraham's soul so that his eyes grew
not too dim to see either Isaac or the ram? For he who contemplates
this scene will be struck with blindness. And yet, it is rare enough
that one is unnerved or is struck with blindness, and still more
rare that one narrates worthily what there did take place between
father and son. To be sure, we know well enough--it was but
a trial!

If Abraham had doubted, when standing on Mount Moriah; if he
had looked about him in perplexity; if he had accidentally discovered
the ram before drawing his knife; if God had permitted him to
sacrifice it instead of Isaac--then would he have returned home,
and all would have been as before, he would have had Sarah and
would have kept Isaac; and yet how different all would have been!
For then had his return been a flight, his salvation an accident,
his reward disgrace; his future, perchance, perdition. Then
would he have borne witness neither to his faith nor to God's
mercy, but would have witnessed only to the terror of going to
Mount Moriah. Then Abraham would not have been forgotten, nor
either Mount Moriah. It would be mentioned, then, not as is Mount
Ararat on which the Ark landed, but as a sign of terror, because
it was there Abraham doubted.

Venerable patriarch Abraham! When you returned home from Mount
Moriah you required no encomiums to console you for what you had
lost; for, indeed, you did win all and still kept Isaac, as we
all know. And the Lord did no more take him from your side, but
you sate gladly at table with him in your tent as in the life to
come you will, for all times. Venerable patriarch Abraham! Thousands
of years have passed since those times, but still you need no
late-born lover to snatch your memory from the power of oblivion,
for every language remembers you--and yet do you reward your lover
more gloriously than any one, rendering him blessed in your
bosom, and taking heart and eyes captive by the marvel of your
deed. Venerable patriarch Abraham! Second father of the race! You
who first perceived and bore witness to that unbounded passion
which has but scorn for the terrible fight with the raging elements
and the strength of brute creation, in order to struggle with God;
you who first felt that sublimest of all passions, you who found
the holy, pure, humble expression for the divine madness which was
a marvel to the heathen--forgive him who would speak in your praise,
in case he did it not fittingly. He spoke humbly, as if it concerned
the desire of his heart; he spoke briefly, as is seemly; but he will
never forget that you required a hundred years to obtain a son of
your old age, against all expections; that you had to draw the knife
before being permitted to keep Isaac; he will never forget that in
a hundred and thirty years you never got farther than to faith.




PRELIMINARY EXPECTORATION


An old saying, derived from the world of experience, has it that
"he who will not work shall not eat.[7]" But, strange to say, this
does not hold true in the world where it is thought applicable; for
in the world of matter the law of imperfection prevails, and we see,
again and again, that he also who will not work has bread to
eat--indeed, that he who sleeps has a greater abundance of it than
he who works. In the world of matter everything belongs to whosoever
happens to possess it; it is thrall to the law of indifference, and
he who happens to possess the Ring also has the Spirit of the Ring
at his beck and call, whether now he be Noureddin or Aladdin,[8] and
he who controls the treasures of this world, controls them, howsoever
he managed to do so. It is different in the world of spirit. There,
an eternal and divine order obtains, there the rain does not fall
on the just and the unjust alike, nor does the sun shine on the good
and the evil alike;[9] but there the saying does hold true that he
who will not work shall not eat, and only he who was troubled shall
find rest, and only he who descends into the nether world shall
rescue his beloved, and only he who unsheathes his knife shall be
given Isaac again. There, he who will not work shall not eat, but
shall be deceived, as the gods deceived Orpheus with an immaterial
figure instead of his beloved Euridice,[10] deceived him because
he was love-sick and not courageous, deceived him because he was
a player on the cithara rather than a man. There, it avails not
to have an Abraham for one's father,[11] or to have seventeen
ancestors. But in that world the saying about Israel's maidens
will hold true of him who will not work: he shall bring forth
wind;[12] but he who will work shall give birth to his own father.

There is a kind of learning which would presumptuously introduce
into the world of spirit the same law of indifference under which
the world of matter groans. It is thought that to know about great
men and great deeds is quite sufficient, and that other exertion
is not necessary. And therefore this learning shall not eat, but
shall perish of hunger while seeing all things transformed into
gold by its touch. And what, forsooth, does this learning really
know? There were many thousands of contemporaries, and countless
men in after times, who knew all about the triumphs of Miltiades;
but there was only one whom they rendered sleepless.[13] There
have existed countless generations that knew by heart, word for
word, the story of Abraham; but how many has it rendered sleepless?

Now the story of Abraham has the remarkable property of always
being glorious, in however limited a sense it is understood; still,
here also the point is whether one means to labor and exert one's
half. Now people do not care to labor and exert themselves, but
wish nevertheless to understand the story. They extol Abraham,
but how? By expressing the matter in the most general terms and
saying: "the great thing about him was that he loved God so ardently
that he was willing to sacrifice to Him his most precious possession."
That is very true; but "the most precious possession" is an indefinite
expression. As one's thoughts, and one's mouth, run on one assumes,
in a very easy fashion, the identity of Isaac and "the most precious
possession"--and meanwhile he who is meditating may smoke his
pipe, and his audience comfortably stretch out their legs. If
the rich youth whom Christ met on his way[14] had sold all his
possessions and given all to the poor, we would extol him as we
extol all which is great--aye, would not understand even him
without labor; and yet would he never have become an Abraham,
notwithstanding his sacrificing the most precious possessions he
had. That which people generally forget in the story of Abraham
is his fear and anxiety; for as regards money, one is not ethically
responsible for it, whereas for his son a father has the highest
and most sacred responsibility. However, fear is a dreadful thing
for timorous spirits, so they omit it. And yet they wish to speak
of Abraham.

So they keep on speaking, and in the course of their speech the
two terms Isaac and "the most precious thing" are used alternately,
and everything is in the best order. But now suppose that among
the audience there was a man who suffered with sleeplessness--and
then the most terrible and profound, the most tragic, and at the
same time the most comic, misunderstanding is within the range of
possibility. That is, suppose this man goes home and wishes to do
as did Abraham; for his son is his most precious possession. If a
certain preacher learned of this he would, perhaps, go to him, he
would gather up all his spiritual dignity and exclaim: "Thou
abominable creature, thou scum of humanity, what devil possessed
thee to wish to murder thy son?" And this preacher, who had not
felt any particular warmth, nor perspired while speaking about
Abraham, this preacher would be astonished himself at the earnest
wrath with which he poured forth his thunders against that poor
wretch; indeed, he would rejoice over himself, for never had he
spoken with such power and unction, and he would have said to
his wife: "I am an orator, the only thing I have lacked so far
was the occasion. Last Sunday, when speaking about Abraham, I
did not feel thrilled in the least."

Now, if this same orator had just a bit of sense to spare, I
believe he would lose it if the sinner would reply, in a quiet
and dignified manner: "Why, it was on this very same matter
you preached, last Sunday!" But however could the preacher have
entertained such thoughts? Still, such was the case, and the
preacher's mistake was merely not knowing what he was talking
about. Ah, would that some poet might see his way clear to prefer
such a situation to the stuff and nonsense of which novels and
comedies are full! For the comic and the tragic here run parallel
to infinity. The sermon probably was ridiculous enough in itself,
but it became infinitely ridiculous through the very natural
consequence it had. Or, suppose now the sinner was converted
by this lecture without daring to raise any objection, and this
zealous divine now went home elated, glad in the consciousness
of being effective, not only in the pulpit, but chiefly, and
with irresistible power, as a spiritual guide, inspiring his
congregation on Sunday, whilst on Monday he would place himself
like a cherub with flaming sword before the man who by his actions
tried to give the lie to the old saying that "the course of the
world follows not the priest's word."

If, on the other hand, the sinner were not convinced of his error
his position would become tragic. He would probably be executed,
or else sent to the lunatic asylum--at any rate, he would become
a sufferer in this world; but in another sense I should think
that Abraham rendered him happy; for he who labors, he shall not
perish.

Now how shall we explain the contradiction contained in that
sermon? Is it due to Abraham's having the reputation of being
a great man--so that whatever he does is great, but if another
should undertake to do the same it is a sin, a heinous sin? If
this be the case I prefer not to participate in such thoughtless
laudations. If faith cannot make it a sacred thing to wish to
sacrifice one's son, then let the same judgment be visited on
Abraham as on any other man. And if we perchance lack the courage
to drive our thoughts to the logical conclusion and to say that
Abraham was a murderer, then it were better to acquire that
courage, rather than to waste one's time on undeserved encomiums.
The fact is, the ethical expression for what Abraham did is
that he wanted to murder Isaac; the religious, that he wanted
to sacrifice him. But precisely in this contradiction is contained
the fear which may well rob one of one's sleep. And yet Abraham
were not Abraham without this fear. Or, again, supposing Abraham
did not do what is attributed to him, if his action was an entirely
different one, based on conditions of those times, then let us
forget him; for what is the use of calling to mind that past which
can no longer become a present reality?--Or, the speaker had
perhaps forgotten the essential fact that Isaac was the son. For
if faith is eliminated, having been reduced to a mere nothing,
then only the brutal fact remains that Abraham wanted to murder
Isaac--which is easy for everybody to imitate who has not the
faith--the faith, that is, which renders it most difficult for
him....


Love has its priests in the poets, and one hears at times a poet's
voice which worthily extols it. But not a word does one hear of
faith. Who is there to speak in honor of that passion? Philosophy
"goes right on." Theology sits at the window with a painted visage
and sues for philosophy's favor, offering it her charms. It is
said to be difficult to understand the philosophy of Hegel; but
to understand Abraham, why, that is an easy matter! To proceed
further than Hegel is a wonderful feat, but to proceed further than
Abraham, why, nothing is easier! Personally, I have devoted a
considerable amount of time to a study of Hegelian philosophy
and believe I understand it fairly well; in fact, I am rash enough
to say that when, notwithstanding an effort, I am not able to
understand him in some passages, it is because he is not entirely
clear about the matter himself. All this intellectual effort I
perform easily and naturally, and it does not cause my head to
ache. On the other hand, whenever I attempt to think about Abraham
I am, as it were, overwhelmed. At every moment I am aware of
the enormous paradox which forms the content of Abraham's life,
at every moment I am repulsed, and my thought, notwithstanding
its passionate attempts, cannot penetrate into it, cannot forge
on the breadth of a hair. I strain every muscle in order to
envisage the problem--and become a paralytic in the same moment.

I am by no means unacquainted with what has been admired as great
and noble, my soul feels kinship with it, being satisfied, in
all humility, that it was also my cause the hero espoused; and
when contemplating his deed I say to myself: "_jam tua causa
agitur._[15]" I am able to identify myself with the hero; but I
cannot do so with Abraham, for whenever I have reached his height
I fall down again, since he confronts me as the paradox. It is
by no means my intention to maintain that faith is something
inferior, but, on the contrary, that it is the highest of all
things; also that it is dishonest in philosophy to offer something
else instead, and to pour scorn on faith; but it ought to understand
its own nature in order to know what it can offer. It should take
away nothing; least of all, fool people out of something as if
it were of no value. I am not unacquainted with the sufferings
and dangers of life, but I do not fear them, and cheerfully go
forth to meet them.... But my courage is not, for all that, the
courage of faith, and is as nothing compared with it. I cannot
carry out the movement of faith: I cannot close my eyes and
confidently plunge into the absurd--it is impossible for me; but
neither do I boast of it....

Now I wonder if every one of my contemporaries is really able
to perform the movements of faith. Unless I am much mistaken
they are, rather, inclined to be proud of making what they perhaps
think me unable to do, viz., the imperfect movement. It is repugnant
to my soul to do what is so often done, to speak inhumanly about
great deeds, as if a few thousands of years were an immense space
of time. I prefer to speak about them in a human way and as though
they had been done but yesterday, to let the great deed itself
be the distance which either inspires or condemns me. Now if I,
in the capacity of tragic hero--for a higher flight I am unable
to take--if I had been summoned to such an extraordinary royal
progress as was the one to Mount Moriah, I know very well what I
would have done. I would not have been craven enough to remain
at home; neither would I have dawdled on the way; nor would I
have forgot my knife--just to draw out the end a bit. But I
am rather sure that I would have been promptly on the spot,
with every thing in order--in fact, would probably have been
there before the appointed time, so as to have the business
soon over with. But I know also what I would have done besides.
In the moment I mounted my horse I would have said to myself:
"Now all is lost, God demands Isaac, I shall sacrifice him, and
with him all my joy--but for all that, God is love and will
remain so for me; for in this world God and I cannot speak together,
we have no language in common."

Possibly, one or the other of my contemporaries will be stupid
enough, and jealous enough of great deeds, to wish to persuade
himself and me that if I had acted thus I should have done something
even greater than what Abraham did; for my sublime resignation
was (he thinks) by far more ideal and poetic than Abraham's
literal-minded action. And yet this is absolutely not so, for my
sublime resignation was only a substitute for faith. I could not
have made more than the infinite movement (of resignation) to
find myself and again repose in myself. Nor would I have loved
Isaac as Abraham loved him. The fact that I was resolute enough
to resign is sufficient to prove my courage in a human sense,
and the fact that I loved him with my whole heart is the very
presupposition without which my action would be a crime; but
still I did not love as did Abraham, for else I would have hesitated
even in the last minute, without, for that matter, arriving too
late on Mount Moriah. Also, I would have spoiled the whole business
by my behavior; for if I had had Isaac restored to me I would
have been embarrassed. That which was an easy matter for Abraham
would have been difficult for me, I mean, to rejoice again in
Isaac; for he who with all the energy of his soul _proprio motu
et propriis auspiciis_[16] has made the infinite movement of
resignation and can do no more, he will retain possession of
Isaac only in his sorrow.

But what did Abraham? He arrived neither too early nor too late.
He mounted his ass and rode slowly on his way. And all the while
he had faith, believing that God would not demand Isaac of him,
though ready all the while to sacrifice him, should it be demanded
of him. He believed this on the strength of the absurd; for there
was no question of human calculation any longer. And the absurdity
consisted in God's, who yet made this demand of him, recalling his
demand the very next moment. Abraham ascended the mountain and whilst
the knife already gleamed in his hand he believed--that God would
not demand Isaac of him. He was, to be sure, surprised at the
outcome; but by a double movement he had returned at his first
state of mind and therefore received Isaac back more gladly than
the first time....

On this height, then, stands Abraham. The last stage he loses
sight of is that of infinite resignation. He does really proceed
further, he arrives at faith. For all these caricatures of faith,
wretched lukewarm sloth, which thinks: "Oh, there is no hurry, it
is not necessary to worry before the time comes"; and miserable
hopefulness, which says: "One cannot know what will happen, there
might perhaps--," all these caricatures belong to the sordid view
of life and have already fallen under the infinite scorn of infinite
resignation.

Abraham, I am not able to understand; and in a certain sense I
can learn nothing from him without being struck with wonder. They
who flatter themselves that by merely considering the outcome of
Abraham's story they will necessarily arrive at faith, only deceive
themselves and wish to cheat God out of the first movement of
faith--it were tantamount to deriving worldly wisdom from the
paradox. But who knows, one or the other of them may succeed in
doing this; for our times are not satisfied with faith, and not
even with the miracle of changing water into wine--they "go
right on" changing wine into water.

Is it not preferable to remain satisfied with faith, and is it
not outrageous that every one wishes to "go right on"? If people
in our times decline to be satisfied with love, as is proclaimed
from various sides, where will we finally land? In worldly shrewdness,
in mean calculation, in paltriness and baseness, in all that
which renders man's divine origin doubtful. Were it not better
to stand fast in the faith, and better that he that standeth
take heed lest he fall;[17] for the movement of faith must ever
be made by virtue of the absurd, but, note well, in such wise
that one does not lose the things of this world but wholly and
entirely regains them.

As far as I am concerned, I am able to describe most excellently
the movements of faith; but I cannot make them myself. When a
person wishes to learn how to swim he has himself suspended in
a swimming-belt and then goes through the motions; but that does
not mean that he can swim. In the same fashion I too can go
through the motions of faith; but when I am thrown into the
water I swim; to be sure (for I am not a wader in the shallows),
but I go through a different set of movements, to-wit, those
of infinity; whereas faith does the opposite, to-wit, makes
the movements to regain the finite after having made those of
infinite resignation. Blessed is he who can make these movements,
for he performs a marvelous feat, and I shall never weary of
admiring him, whether now it be Abraham himself or the slave
in Abraham's house, whether it be a professor of philosophy or
a poor servant-girl: it is all the same to me, for I have regard
only to the movements. But these movements I watch closely, and
I will not be deceived, whether by myself or by any one else.
The knights of infinite resignation are easily recognized, for
their gait is dancing and bold. But they who possess the jewel
of faith frequently deceive one because their bearing is curiously
like that of a class of people heartily despised by infinite
resignation as well as by faith--the philistines.

Let me admit frankly that I have not in my experience encountered
any certain specimen of this type; but I do not refuse to admit
that as far as I know, every other person may be such a specimen.
At the same time I will say that I have searched vainly for years.
It is the custom of scientists to travel around the globe to see
rivers and mountains, new stars, gay-colored birds, misshapen
fish, ridiculous races of men. They abandon themselves to a
bovine stupor which gapes at existence and believe they have
seen something worth while. All this does not interest me; but
if I knew where there lived such a knight of faith I would journey
to him on foot, for that marvel occupies my thoughts exclusively.
Not a moment would I leave him out of sight, but would watch
how he makes the movements, and I would consider myself provided
for life, and would divide my time between watching him and
myself practicing the movements, and would thus use all my time
in admiring him.

As I said, I have not met with such a one; but I can easily
imagine him. Here he is. I make his acquaintance and am introduced
to him. The first moment I lay my eyes on him I push him back,
leaping back myself, I hold up my hands in amazement and say
to myself: "Good Lord! that person? Is it really he--why, he
looks like a parish-beadle!" But it is really he. I become more
closely acquainted with him, watching his every movement to see
whether some trifling incongruous movement of his has escaped me,
some trace, perchance, of a signaling from the infinite, a glance,
a look, a gesture, a melancholy air, or a smile, which might
betray the presence of infinite resignation contrasting with
the finite.

But no! I examine his figure from top to toe to discover whether
there be anywhere a chink through which the infinite might be
seen to peer forth. But no! he is of a piece, all through. And
how about his footing? Vigorous, altogether that of finiteness,
no citizen dressed in his very best, prepared to spend his Sunday
afternoon in the park, treads the ground more firmly. He belongs
altogether to this world, no philistine more so. There is no
trace of the somewhat exclusive and haughty demeanor which marks
off the knight of infinite resignation. He takes pleasure in all
things, is interested in everything, and perseveres in whatever
he does with the zest characteristic of persons wholly given to
worldly things. He attends to his business, and when one sees
him one might think he was a clerk who had lost his soul in
doing double bookkeeping, he is so exact. He takes a day off
on Sundays. He goes to church. But no hint of anything supernatural
or any other sign of the incommensurable betrays him, and if one
did not know him it would be impossible to distinguish him in
the congregation, for his brisk and manly singing proves only
that he has a pair of good lungs.

In the afternoon he walks out to the forest. He takes delight
in all he sees, in the crowds of men and women, the new omnibuses,
the Sound--if one met him on the promenade one might think he
was some shopkeeper who was having a good time, so simple is
his joy; for he is not a poet, and in vain have I tried to lure
him into betraying some sign of the poet's detachment. Toward
evening he walks home again, with a gait as steady as that of
a mail-carrier. On his way he happens to wonder whether his
wife will have some little special warm dish ready for him,
when he comes home--as she surely has--as, for instance, a roasted
lamb's head garnished with greens. And if he met one minded
like him he is very likely to continue talking about this dish
with him till they reach the East Gate, and to talk about it
with a zest befitting a chef. As it happens, he has not four
shillings to spare, and yet he firmly believes that his wife
surely has that dish ready for him. If she has, it would be
an enviable sight for distinguished people, and an inspiring
one for common folks, to see him eat, for he has an appetite
greater than Esau's. His wife has not prepared it--strange,
he remains altogether the same.

Again, on his way he passes a building lot and there meets another
man. They fall to talking, and in a trice he erects a building,
freely disposing of everything necessary. And the stranger will
leave him with the impression that he has been talking with a
capitalist--the fact being that the knight of my admiration is
busy with the thought that if it really came to the point he
would unquestionably have the means wherewithal at his disposal.

Now he is lying on his elbows in the window and looking over
the square on which he lives. All that happens there, if it be
only a rat creeping into a gutter-hole, or children playing
together--everything engages his attention, and yet his mind
is at rest as though it were the mind of a girl of sixteen. He
smokes his pipe in the evening, and to look at him you would
swear it was the green-grocer from across the street who is
lounging at the window in the evening twilight. Thus he shows
as much unconcern as any worthless happy-go-lucky fellow; and
yet, every moment he lives he purchases his leisure at the highest
price, for he makes not the least movement except by virtue of
the absurd; and yet, yet--indeed, I might become furious with
anger, if for no other reason than that of envy--and yet, this
man has performed, and is performing every moment, the movement
of infinity... He has resigned everything absolutely, and then
again seized hold of it all on the strength of the absurd...

But this miracle may so easily deceive one that it will be best
if I describe the movements in a given case which may illustrate
their aspect in contact with reality; and that is the important
point. Suppose, then, a young swain falls in love with a princess,
and all his life is bound up in this love. But circumstances are
such that it is out of the question to think of marrying her, an
impossibility to translate his dreams into reality. The slaves of
paltriness, the frogs in the sloughs of life, they will shout, of
course: "Such a love is folly, the rich brewer's widow is quite
as good and solid a match." Let them but croak. The knight of
infinite resignation does not follow their advice, he does not
surrender his love, not for all the riches in the world. He is
no fool, he first makes sure that this love really is the contents
of his life, for his soul is too sound and too proud to waste
itself on a mere intoxication. He is no coward, he is not afraid
to let his love insinuate itself into his most secret and most
remote thoughts, to let it wind itself in innumerable coils about
every fiber of his consciousness--if he is disappointed in his
love he will never be able to extricate himself again. He feels
a delicious pleasure in letting love thrill his every nerve, and
yet his soul is solemn as is that of him who has drained a cup
of poison and who now feels the virus mingle with every drop of
his blood, poised in that moment between life and death.

Having thus imbibed love, and being wholly absorbed in it, he
does not lack the courage to try and dare all. He surveys the
whole situation, he calls together his swift thoughts which like
tame pigeons obey his every beck, he gives the signal, and they
dart in all directions. But when they return, every one bearing
a message of sorrow, and explain to him that it is impossible,
then he becomes silent, he dismisses them, he remains alone;
and then he makes the movement. Now if what I say here is to
have any significance, it is of prime importance that the movement
be made in a normal fashion. The knight of resignation is supposed
to have sufficient energy to concentrate the entire contents
of his life and the realization of existing conditions into
one single wish. But if one lacks this concentration, this devotion
to a single thought; if his soul from the very beginning is
scattered on a number of objects, he will never be able to make
the movement--he will be as worldly-wise in the conduct of his
life as the financier who invests his capital in a number of
securities to win on the one if he should lose on the other;
that is, he is no knight. Furthermore, the knight is supposed
to possess sufficient energy to concentrate all his thought into
a single act of consciousness. If he lacks this concentration he
will only run errands in life and will never be able to assume
the attitude of infinite resignation; for the very minute he
approaches it he will suddenly discover that he forgot something
so that he must remain behind. The next minute, thinks he, it
will be attainable again, and so it is; but such inhibitions
will never allow him to make the movement but will, rather,
tend to let him sink ever deeper into the mire.

Our knight, then, performs the movement--which movement? Is he
intent on forgetting the whole affair, which, too, would presuppose
much concentration? No, for the knight does not contradict himself,
and it is a contradiction to forget the main contents of one's
life and still remain the same person. And he has no desire to
become another person; neither does he consider such a desire to
smack of greatness. Only lower natures forget themselves and become
something different. Thus the butterfly has forgotten that it
once was a caterpillar--who knows but it may forget altogether
that it once was a butterfly, and turn into a fish! Deeper natures
never forget themselves and never change their essential qualities.
So the knight remembers all; but precisely this remembrance is
painful. Nevertheless, in his infinite resignation he has become
reconciled with existence. His love for the princess has become
for him the expression of an eternal love, has assumed a religious
character, has been transfigured into a love for the eternal being
which, to be sure, denied him the fulfillment of his love, yet
reconciled him again by presenting him with the abiding consciousness
of his love's being preserved in an everlasting form of which no
reality can rob him....

Now, he is no longer interested in what the princess may do, and
precisely this proves that he has made the movement of infinite
resignation correctly. In fact, this is a good criterion for
detecting whether a person's movement is sincere or just make-believe.
Take a person who believes that he too has resigned, but lo!
time passed, the princess did something on her part, for example,
married a prince, and then his soul lost the elasticity of its
resignation. This ought to show him that he did not make the
movement correctly, for he who has resigned absolutely is sufficient
unto himself. The knight does not cancel his resignation, but
preserves his love as fresh and young as it was at the first
moment, he never lets go of it just because his resignation is
absolute. Whatever the princess does, cannot disturb him, for it
is only the lower natures who have the law for their actions in
some other person, i.e. have the premises of their actions outside
of themselves....

Infinite resignation is the last stage which goes before faith,
so that every one who has not made the movement of infinite
resignation cannot have faith; for only through absolute resignation
do I become conscious of my eternal worth, and only then can
there arise the problem of again grasping hold of this world by
virtue of faith.

We will now suppose the knight of faith in the same case. He
does precisely as the other knight, he absolutely resigns the
love which is the contents of his life, he is reconciled to the
pain; but then the miraculous happens, he makes one more movement,
strange beyond comparison, saying: "And still I believe that I
shall marry her--marry her by virtue of the absurd, by virtue of
the act that to God nothing is impossible." Now the absurd is not
one of the categories which belong to the understanding proper.
It is not identical with the improbable, the unforeseen, the
unexpected. The very moment our knight resigned himself he made
sure of the absolute impossibility, in any human sense, of his
love. This was the result reached by his reflections, and he had
sufficient energy to make them. In a transcendent sense, however,
by his very resignation, the attainment of his end is not impossible;
but this very act of again taking possession of his love is at
the same time a relinquishment of it. Nevertheless this kind of
possession is by no means an absurdity to the intellect; for the
intellect all the while continues to be right, as it is aware
that in the world of finalities, in which reason rules, his
love was and is, an impossibility. The knight of faith realizes
this fully as well. Hence the only thing which can save him is
recourse to the absurd, and this recourse he has through his
faith. That is, he clearly recognizes the impossibility, and
in the same moment he believes the absurd; for if he imagined he
had faith, without at the same time recognizing, with all the
passion his soul is capable of, that his love is impossible,
he would be merely deceiving himself, and his testimony would
be of no value, since he had not arrived even at the stage of
absolute resignation....

This last movement, the paradoxical movement of faith, I cannot
make, whether or no it be my duty, although I desire nothing
more ardently than to be able to make it. It must be left to
a person's discretion whether he cares to make this confession;
and at any rate, it is a matter between him and the Eternal Being,
who is the object of his faith, whether an amicable adjustment
can be affected. But what every person can do is to make the
movement of absolute resignation, and I for my part would not
hesitate to declare him a coward who imagines he cannot perform
it. It is a different matter with faith. But what no person has
a right to, is to delude others into the belief that faith is
something of no great significance, or that it is an easy matter,
whereas it is the greatest and most difficult of all things.

But the story of Abraham is generally interpreted in a different
way. God's mercy is praised which restored Isaac to him--it
was but a trial! A trial. This word may mean much or little,
and yet the whole of it passes off as quickly as the story is
told: one mounts a winged horse, in the same instant one arrives
on Mount Moriah, and _presto_ one sees the ram. It is not remembered
that Abraham only rode on an ass which travels but slowly, that
it was a three days' journey for him, and that he required some
additional time to collect the firewood, to bind Isaac, and to
whet his knife.

And yet one extols Abraham. He who is to preach the sermon may
sleep comfortably until a quarter of an hour before he is to
preach it, and the listener may comfortably sleep during the
sermon, for everything is made easy enough, without much exertion
either to preacher or listener. But now suppose a man was present
who suffered with sleeplessness and who went home and sat in a
corner and reflected as follows: "The whole lasted but a minute,
you need only wait a little while, and then the ram will be shown
and the trial will be over." Now if the preacher should find
him in this frame of mind, I believe he would confront him
in all his dignity and say to him: "Wretch that thou art, to
let thy soul lapse into such folly; miracles do not happen, all
life is a trial." And as he proceeded he would grow more and
more passionate, and would become ever more satisfied with himself;
and whereas he had not noticed any congestion in his head whilst
preaching about Abraham, he now feels the veins on his forehead
swell. Yet who knows but he would stand aghast if the sinner
should answer him in a quiet and dignified manner that it was
precisely this about which he preached the Sunday before.

Let us then either waive the whole story of Abraham, or else
learn to stand in awe of the enormous paradox which constitutes
his significance for us, so that we may learn to understand that
our age, like every age, may rejoice if it has faith. If the
story of Abraham is not a mere nothing, an illusion, or if it
is just used for show and as a pastime, the mistake cannot by
any means be in the sinner's wishing to do likewise; but it is
necessary to find out how great was the deed which Abraham performed,
in order that the man may judge for himself whether he has the
courage and the mission to do likewise. The comical contradiction
in the procedure of the preacher was his reduction of the story of
Abraham to insignificance whereas he rebuked the other man for
doing the very same thing.

But should we then cease to speak about Abraham? I certainly
think not. But if I were to speak about him I would first of
all describe the terrors of his trial. To that end leech-like
I would suck all the suffering and distress out of the anguish
of a father, in order to be able to describe what Abraham suffered
whilst yet preserving his faith. I would remind the hearer that
the journey lasted three days and a goodly part of the fourth--in
fact, these three and a half days ought to become infinitely
longer than the few thousand years which separate me from Abraham.
I would remind him, as I think right, that every person is still
permitted to turn about-before trying his strength on this formidable
task; in fact, that he may return every instant in repentance.
Provided this is done, I fear for nothing. Nor do I fear to
awaken great desire among people to attempt to emulate Abraham.
But to get out a cheap edition of Abraham and yet forbid every
one to do as he did, that I call ridiculous.[18]


[Footnote 1: Freely after Genesis 22.]

[Footnote 2: Genesis 20, 11 f.]

[Footnote 3: Genesis 22, 1.]

[Footnote 4: Luke 23, 30.]

[Footnote 5: Genesis 22, 3.]

[Footnote 6: Genesis 22, 9.]

[Footnote 7: _Cf._ Thessalonians 3, 10.]

[Footnote 8: In _Aladdin_, Oehlenschläger's famous dramatic poem,
Aladdin, "the cheerful son of nature," is contrasted with Noureddin,
representing the gloom of doubt and night.]

[Footnote 9: Matthew 5, 45.]

[Footnote 10: _Cf._ not the legend but Plato's _Symposion._]

[Footnote 11: Matthew 3, 9.]

[Footnote 12: Isaiah 26, 18.]

[Footnote 13: Themistocles, that is; see Plutarch, Lives.]

[Footnote 14: Matthew 19, 16f.]

[Footnote 15: Your cause, too, is at stake.]

[Footnote 16: By his own impulse and on his own responsibility.]

[Footnote 17: _Cf._ I Cor. 10, 12.]

[Footnote 18: The above, with the omissions indicated, constitutes
about one-third of "Fear and Trembling."]




PREPARATION FOR A CHRISTIAN LIFE




I[1]


"COME HITHER UNTO ME, ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE
HEAVY LADEN, AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST."
(MATTHEW 11, 28.)




THE INVITATION


"Come hither!"--It is not at all strange if he who is in danger
and needs help--speedy, immediate help, perhaps--it is not strange
if he cries out: "come hither"! Nor it is strange that a quack
cries his wares: "come hither, I cure all maladies"; alas, for
in the case of the quack it is only too true that it is the
physician who has need of the sick. "Come hither all ye who
at extortionate prices can pay for the cure--or at any rate
for the medicine; here is physic for everybody--who can pay;
come hither!"

In all other cases, however, it is generally true that he who
can help must be sought; and, when found, may be difficult of
access; and, if access is had, his help may have to be implored
a long time; and when his help has been implored a long time,
he may be moved only with difficulty, that is, he sets a high
price on his services; and sometimes, precisely when he refuses
payment or generously asks for none, it is only an expression
of how infinitely high he values his services. On the other hand,
he[2] who sacrificed himself, he sacrifices himself, here too;
it is indeed he who seeks those in need of help, is himself the
one who goes about and calls, almost imploringly: "come hither!"
He, the only one who can help, and help with what alone is indispensable,
and can save from the one truly mortal disease, he does not
wait for people to come to him, but comes himself, without having
been called; for it is he who calls out to them, it is he who
holds out help--and what help! Indeed, that simple sage of antiquity[3]
was as infinitely right as the majority who do the opposite are
wrong, in setting no great price, whether on himself or his
instruction; even if he thus in a certain sense proudly expressed
the utter difference in kind between payment and his services.
But he was not so solicitous as to beg any one to come to him,
notwithstanding--or shall I say because?--he was not altogether
sure what his help signified; for the more sure one is that his
help is the only one obtainable, the more reason has he, in a
human sense, to ask a great price for it; and the less sure one
is, the more reason has he to offer freely the possible help
he has, in order to do at least something for others. But he
who calls himself the Savior, and knows that he is, he calls
out solicitously: "come hither unto me!"


"Come hither all ye!"--Strange! For if he who, when it comes
to the point, perhaps cannot help a single one--if such a one
should boastfully invite everybody, that would not seem so
very strange, man's nature being such as it is. But if a man
is absolutely sure of being able to help, and at the same time
willing to help, willing to devote his all in doing so, and with
all sacrifices, then he generally makes at least one reservation;
which is, to make a choice among those he means to help. That
is, however willing one may be, still it is not everybody one
cares to help; one does not care to sacrifice one's self to
that extent. But he, the only one who can really help, and really
help everybody--the only one, therefore, who really can invite
everybody--he makes no conditions whatever; but utters the invitation
which, from the beginning of the world, seems to have been reserved
for him: "Come hither all ye!" Ah, human self-sacrifice, even when
thou art most beautiful and noble, when we admire thee most: this
is a sacrifice still greater, which is, to sacrifice every provision
for one's own self, so that in one's willingness to help there is
not even the least partiality. Ah, the love that sets no price on
one's self, that makes one forget altogether that he is the
helper, and makes one altogether blind as to who it is one helps,
but infinitely careful only that he be a sufferer, whatever else he
may be; and thus willing unconditionally to help everybody--different,
alas! in this from everybody!

"Come hither unto me!" Strange! For human compassion also, and
willingly, does something for them that labor and are heavy laden;
one feeds the hungry, clothes the naked, makes charitable gifts,
builds charitable institutions, and if the compassion be heartfelt,
perhaps even visits those that labor and are heavy laden. But to
invite them to come to one, that will never do, because then all
one's household and manner of living would have to be changed.
For a man cannot himself live in abundance, or at any rate in
well-being and happiness, and at the same time dwell in one and
the same house together with, and in daily intercourse with, the
poor and miserable, with them that labor and are heavy laden! In
order to be able to invite them in such wise, a man must himself
live altogether in the same way, as poor as the poorest, as lowly
as the lowliest, familiar with the sorrows and sufferings of life,
and altogether belonging to the same station as they whom he invites,
that is, they who labor and are heavy laden. If he wishes to
invite a sufferer, he must either change his own condition to be
like that of the sufferer, or else change that of the sufferer to
be like his own; for if this is not done the difference will
stand out only the more by contrast. And if you wish to invite
all those who suffer--for you may make an exception with one of
them and change his condition--it can be done only in one way,
which is, to change your condition so as to live as they do;
provided your life be not already lived thus, as was the case
with Him who said: "Come hither unto me, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden!" Thus said he; and they who lived with him
saw him, and behold! there was not even the least thing in his
manner of life to contradict it. With the silent and truthful
eloquence of actual performance his life expresses--even though
he had never in his life said these words--his life expresses:
"Come hither, unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden"!
He abides by his word, or he himself is the word; he is what he
says, and also in this sense he is the Word.[4]


"All ye that labor and are heavy laden." Strange! His only concern
is lest there be a single one who labors and is heavy laden who
does not hear this invitation. Neither does he fear that too many
will come. Ah, heart-room makes house-room; but where wilt thou
find heart-room, if not in his heart? He leaves it to each one how
to understand his invitation: he has a clear conscience about
it, for he has invited all those that labor and are heavy laden.

But what means it, then, to labor and be heavy laden? Why does
he not offer a clearer explanation so that one may know exactly
whom he means, and why is he so chary of his words? Ah, thou
narrow-minded one, he is so chary of his words, lest he be narrow-minded;
and thou narrow-hearted one, he is so chary of his words lest
he be narrow-hearted. For such is his love--and love has regard
to all--as to prevent any one from troubling and searching his
heart whether he too be among those invited. And he who would
insist on a more definite explanation, is he not likely to be
some self-loving person who is calculating whether this explanation
does not particularly fit himself; one who does not consider that
the more of such exact explanations are offered, the more certainly
some few would be left in doubt as to whether they were invited?
Ah man, why does thine eye see only thyself, why is it evil because
he is good?[5] The invitation to all men opens the arms of him
who invites, and thus he stands of aspect everlasting; but no
sooner is a closer explanation attempted which might help one
or the other to another kind of certainty, than his aspect would
be transformed and, as it were, a shadow of change would pass
over his countenance.

"I will give you rest." Strange! For then the words "come hither
unto me" must be understood to mean: stay with me, I am rest;
or, it is rest to remain with me. It is not, then, as in other
cases where he who helps and says "come hither" must afterwards
say: "now depart again," explaining to each one where the help
he needs is to be found, where the healing herb grows which will
cure him, or where the quiet spot is found where he may rest
from labor, or where the happier continent exists where one is
not heavy laden. But no, he who opens his arms, inviting every
one--ah, if all, all they that labor and are heavy laden came
to him, he would fold them all to his heart, saying: "stay with
me now; for to stay with me is rest." The helper himself is the
help. Ah, strange, he who invites everybody and wishes to help
everybody, his manner of treating the sick is as if calculated
for every sick man, and as if every sick man who comes to him
were his only patient. For otherwise a physician divides his
time among many patients who, however great their number, still
are far, far from being all mankind. He will prescribe the medicine,
he will say what is to be done, and how it is to be used, and
then he will go--to some other patient; or, in case the patient
should visit him, he will let him depart. The physician cannot
remain sitting all day with one patient, and still less can he
have all his patients about him in his home, and yet sit all
day with one patient without neglecting the others. For this
reason the helper and his help are not one and the same thing.
The help which the physician prescribes is kept with him by the
patient all day so that he may constantly use it, whilst the
physician visits him now and again; or he visits the physician
now and again. But if the helper is also the help, why, then
he will stay with the sick man all day, or the sick man with
him--ah, strange that it is just this helper who invites all men!




II


COME HITHER ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE HEAVY LADEN,
AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST.


What enormous multiplicity, what an almost boundless diversity,
of people invited; for a man, a lowly man, may, indeed, try to
enumerate only a few of these diversities--but he who invites
must invite all men, even if every one specially and individually.


The invitation goes forth, then--along the highways and the
byways, and along the loneliest paths; aye, goes forth where
there is a path so lonely that one man only, and no one else,
knows of it, and goes forth where there is but one track, the
track of the wretched one who fled along that path with his
misery, that and no other track; goes forth even where there is
no path to show how one may return: even there the invitation
penetrates and by itself easily and surely finds its way back--most
easily, indeed, when it brings the fugitive along to him that
issued the invitation. Come hither, come hither all ye, also
thou, and thou, and thou, too, thou loneliest of all fugitives!

Thus the invitation goes forth and remains standing, wheresoever
there is a parting of the ways, in order to call out. Ah, just
as the trumpet call of the soldiers is directed to the four
quarters of the globe, likewise does this invitation sound wherever
there is a meeting of roads; with no uncertain sound--for who
would then come?--but with the certitude of eternity.

It stands by the parting of the ways where worldly and earthly
sufferings have set down their crosses, and calls out: Come
hither, all ye poor and wretched ones, ye who in poverty must
slave in order to assure yourselves, not of a care-free, but of
a toilsome, future; ah, bitter contradiction, to have to slave
for--assuring one's self of that under which one groans, of that
which one flees! Ye despised and overlooked ones, about whose
existence no one, aye, no one is concerned, not so much even as
about some domestic animal which is of greater value! Ye sick,
and halt, and blind, and deaf, and crippled, come hither!--Ye
bed-ridden, aye, come hither, ye too; for the invitation makes
bold to invite even the bed-ridden--to come! Ye lepers; for the
invitation breaks down all differences in order to unite all,
it wishes to make good the hardship caused by the difference
in men, the difference which seats one as a ruler over millions,
in possession of all gifts of fortune, and drives another one
out into the wilderness--and why? (ah, the cruelty of it!) because
(ah, the cruel human inference!) because he is wretched, indescribably
wretched. Why then? Because he stands in need of help, or at
any rate, of compassion. And why, then? Because human compassion
is a wretched thing which is cruel when there is the greatest
need of being compassionate, and compassionate only when, at
bottom, it is not true compassion! Ye sick of heart, ye who only
through your anguish learned to know that a man's heart and an
animal's heart are two different things, and what it means to be
sick at heart--what it means when the physician may be right in
declaring one sound of heart and yet heart-sick; ye whom faithlessness
deceived and whom human sympathy--for the sympathy of man is
rarely late in coming--whom human sympathy made a target for
mockery; all ye wronged and aggrieved and ill-used; all ye noble
ones who, as any and everybody will be able to tell you, deservedly
reap the reward of ingratitude (for why were ye simple enough
to be noble, why foolish enough to be kindly, and disinterested,
and faithful)--all ye victims of cunning, of deceit, of backbiting,
of envy, whom baseness chose as its victim and cowardice left
in the lurch, whether now ye be sacrificed in remote and lonely
places, after having crept away in order to die, or whether ye
be trampled underfoot in the thronging crowds where no one asks
what rights ye have, and no one, what wrongs ye suffer, and no
one, where ye smart or how ye smart, whilst the crowd with brute
force tramples you into the dust--come ye hither!

The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where death
parts death and life. Come hither all ye that sorrow and ye that
vainly labor! For indeed there is rest in the grave; but to sit
by a grave, or to stand by a grave, or to visit a grave, all that
is far from lying in the grave; and to read to one's self again
and again one's own words which one knows by heart, the epitaph
which one devised one's self and understands best, namely, who
it is that lies buried here, all that is not the same as to lie
buried one's self. In the grave there Is rest, but by the grave
there is no rest; for it is said: so far and no farther, and so
you may as well go home again. But however often, whether in your
thoughts or in fact, you return to that grave--you will never get
any farther, you will not get away from the spot, and this is
very trying and is by no means rest. Come ye hither, therefore:
here is the way by which one may go farther, here is rest by
the grave, rest from the sorrow over loss, or rest in the sorrow
of loss--through him who everlastingly re-unites those that are
parted, and more firmly than nature unites parents with their
children, and children with their parents--for, alas! they were
parted; and more closely than the minister unites husband and
wife--for, alas! their separation did come to pass; and more
indissolubly than the bond of friendship unites friend with
friend--for, alas! it was broken. Separation penetrated everywhere
and brought with it sorrow and unrest; but here is rest!--Come
hither also ye who had your abodes assigned to you among the
graves, ye who are considered dead to human society, but neither
missed nor mourned--not buried and yet dead; that is, belonging
neither to life nor to death; ye, alas! to whom human society
cruelly closed its doors and for whom no grave has as yet opened
itself in pity--come hither, ye also, here is rest, and here is
life!

The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where the road
of sin turns away from the inclosure of innocence--ah, come hither,
ye are so close to him; but a single step in the opposite direction,
and ye are infinitely far from him. Very possibly ye do not yet
stand in need of rest, nor grasp fully what that means; but still
follow the invitation, so that he who invites may save you from
a predicament out of which it is so difficult and dangerous to
be saved; and so that, being saved, ye may stay with him who is
the Savior of all, likewise of innocence. For even if it were
possible that innocence be found somewhere, and altogether pure:
why should not innocence also need a savior to keep it safe from
evil?--The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where
the road of sin turns away to enter more deeply into sin. Come
hither all ye who have strayed and have been lost, whatever may
have been your error and sin: whether one more pardonable in the
sight of man and nevertheless perhaps more frightful, or one
more terrible in the sight of man and yet, perchance, more pardonable;
whether it be one which became known here on earth or one which,
though hidden, yet is known in heaven--and even if ye found
pardon here on earth without finding rest in your souls, or
found no pardon because ye did not seek it, or because ye sought
it in vain: ah, return and come hither, here is rest!

The invitation stands at the parting of the ways, where the
road of sin turns away for the last time and to the eye is lost
in perdition. Ah, return, return, and come hither! Do not shrink
from the difficulties of the retreat, however great; do not fear
the irksome way of conversion, however laboriously it may lead
to salvation; whereas sin with winged speed and growing pace
leads forward or--downward, so easily, so indescribably easy--as
easily, in fact, as when a horse, altogether freed from having
to pull, cannot even with all his might stop the vehicle which
pushes him into the abyss. Do not despair over each relapse which
the God of patience has patience enough to pardon, and which a
sinner should surely have patience enough to humble himself under.
Nay, fear nothing and despair not: he that sayeth "come hither,"
he is with you on the way, from him come help and pardon on that
way of conversion which leads to him; and with him is rest.

Come hither all, all ye--with him is rest; and he will raise no
difficulties, he does but one thing: he opens his arms. He will
not first ask you, you sufferer--as righteous men, alas, are
accustomed to, even when willing to help--"Are you not perhaps
yourself the cause of your misfortune, have you nothing with
which to reproach yourself?" It is so easy to fall into this
very human error, and from appearances to judge a man's success
or failure: for instance, if a man is a cripple, or deformed,
or has an unprepossessing appearance, to infer that therefore
he is a bad man; or, when a man is unfortunate enough to suffer
reverses so as to be ruined or so as to go down in the world,
to infer that therefore he is a vicious man. Ah, and this is
such an exquisitely cruel pleasure, this being conscious of
one's own righteousness as against the sufferer--explaining his
afflictions as God's punishment, so that one does not even--dare
to help him; or asking him that question which condemns him
and flatters our own righteousness, before helping him. But
he will not ask you thus, will not in such cruel fashion be
your benefactor. And if you are yourself conscious of your sin
he will not ask about it, will not break still further the bent
reed, but raise you up, if you will but join him. He will not
point you out by way of contrast, and place you outside of himself,
so that your sin will stand out as still more terrible, but he
will grant you a hiding place within him; and hidden within him
your sins will be hidden. For he is the friend of sinners. Let
him but behold a sinner, and he not only stands still, opening
his arms and saying "come hither," nay, but he stands--and waits,
as did the father of the prodigal son; or he does not merely
remain standing and waiting, but goes out to search, as the
shepherd went forth to search for the strayed sheep, or as the
woman went to search for the lost piece of silver. He goes--nay,
he has gone, but an infinitely longer way than any shepherd or
any woman, for did he not go the infinitely long way from being
God to becoming man, which he did to seek sinners?




III




COME HITHER UNTO ME ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE HEAVY
LADEN, AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST.


"Come hither!" For he supposes that they that labor and are
heavy laden feel their burden and their labor, and that they
stand there now, perplexed and sighing--one casting about with
his eyes to discover whether there is help in sight anywhere;
another with his eyes fixed on the ground, because he can see
no consolation; and a third with his eyes staring heavenward,
as though help was bound to come from heaven--but all seeking.
Therefore he sayeth: "come hither!" But he invites not him who
has ceased to seek and to sorrow.--"Come hither!" For he who
invites knows that it is a mark of true suffering, if one walks
alone and broods in silent disconsolateness, without courage to
confide in any one, and with even less self-confidence to dare
to hope for help. Alas, not only he whom we read about was possessed
of a dumb devil.[6] No suffering which does not first of all
render the sufferer dumb is of much significance, no more than
the love which does not render one silent; for those sufferers
who run on about their afflictions neither labor nor are heavy
laden. Behold, therefore the inviter will not wait till they
that labor and are heavy laden come to him, but calls them lovingly;
for all his willingness to help might, perhaps, be of no avail
if he did not say these words and thereby take the first step;
for in the call of these words: "come hither unto me!" he comes
himself to them. Ah, human compassion--sometimes, perhaps, it is
indeed praiseworthy self-restraint, sometimes, perhaps, even true
compassion, which may cause you to refrain from questioning him
whom you suppose to be brooding over a hidden affliction; but
also, how often indeed is this compassion but worldly wisdom which
does not care to know too much! Ah, human'compassion--how often
was it not pure curiosity, and not compassion, which prompted
you to venture into the secret of one afflicted; and how burdensome
it was--almost like a punishment of your curiosity--when he
accepted your invitation and came to you! But he who sayeth
these redeeming words "Come hither!" he is not deceiving himself
in saying these words, nor will he deceive you when you come to
him in order to find rest by throwing your burden on him. He
follows the promptings of his heart in saying these words, and
his heart follows his words; if you then follow these words,
they will follow you back again to his heart. This follows as
a matter of course--ah, will you not follow the invitation?--"Come
hither!" For he supposes that they that labor and are heavy
laden are so worn out and overtaxed, and so near swooning that
they have forgotten, as though in a stupor, that there is such
a thing as consolation. Alas, or he knows for sure that there
is no consolation and no help unless it is sought from him; and
therefore must he call out to them "Come hither!"


"Come hither!" For is it not so that every society has some
symbol or token which is worn by those who belong to it? When
a young girl is adorned in a certain manner one knows that she
is going to the dance: Come hither all ye that labor and are
heavy laden--come hither! You need not carry an external and
visible badge; come but with your head anointed and your face
washed, if only you labor in your heart and are heavy laden.


"Come hither!" Ah, do not stand still and consider; nay, consider,
consider that with every moment you stand still after having
heard the invitation you will hear the call more faintly and thus
withdraw from it, even though you are standing still.--"Come
hither!" Ah, however weary and faint you be from work, or from
the long, long and yet hitherto fruitless search for help and
salvation, and even though you may feel as if you could not
take one more step, and not wait one more moment, without dropping
to the ground: ah, but this one step and here is rest!--"Come
hither!" But if, alas, there be one who is so wretched that
he cannot come?--Ah, a sigh is sufficient; your mere sighing
or him is also to come hither.




THE PAUSE


COME HITHER UNTO ME ALL YE THAT LABOR AND ARE HEAVY
LADEN, AND I SHALL GIVE YOU REST.


Pause now! But what is there to give pause? That which in the
same instant makes all undergo an absolute change--so that,
instead of seeing an immense throng ofthem that labor and are
heavy laden following the invitation, you will in the end behold
the very opposite, that is, an immense throng of men who flee
back shudderingly, scrambling to get away, trampling all down
before them; so that, if one were to infer the sense of what
had been said from the result it produced, one would have to
infer that the words had been "_procul o procul este profani_,"
rather than "come hither"--that gives pause which is infinitely
more important and infinitely more decisive: THE PERSON OF HIM
WHO INVITES. Not in the sense that he is not the man to do what
he has said, or not God, to keep what he has promised; no, in
a very different sense.


Pause is given by the fact that he who invites is, and insists
on being, the definite historic person he was 1800 years ago,
and that he as this definite person, and living under the conditions
then obtaining, spoke these words of invitation.--He is not, and
does not wish to be, one about whom one may simply know something
from history (i.e. world history, history proper, as against
Sacred History); for from history one cannot "learn" anything
about him, the simple reason being that nothing can be "known"
about him.--He does not wish to be judged in a human way, from
the results of his life; that is, he is and wishes to be, a
rock of offense and the object of faith. To judge him after
the consequences of his life is a blasphemy, for being God, his
life, and the very fact that he was then living and really did
live, is infinitely more important than all the consequences of
it in history.




_A_ Who spoke these words of invitation?


He that invites. Who is he? Jesus Christ. Which Jesus Christ?
He that sits in glory on the right side of his Father? No. From
his seat of glory he spoke not a single word. Therefore it is
Jesus Christ in his lowliness, and in the condition of lowliness,
who spoke these words.

Is then Jesus Christ not the same? Yes, verily, he is today, and
was yesterday, and 1800 years ago, the same who abased himself,
assuming the form of a servant--the Jesus Christ who spake these
words of invitation. It is also he who hath said that he would
return again in glory. In his return in glory he is, again, the
same Jesus Christ; but this has not yet come to pass.

Is he then not in glory now? Assuredly, that the Christian believes.
But it was in his lowly condition that he spoke these words; he
did not speak them from his glory. And about his return in glory
nothing can be known, for this can in the strictest sense be a
matter of belief only. But a believer one cannot become except
by having gone to him in his lowly condition--to him, the rock
of offense and the object of faith. In other shape he does not
exist, for only thus did he exist. That he will return in glory
is indeed expected, but can be expected and believed only by him
who believes, and has believed, in him as he was here on earth.

Jesus Christ is, then, the same; yet lived he 1800 years ago in
debasement, and is transfigured only at his return. As yet he
has not returned; therefore he is still the one in lowly guise
about whom we believe that he will return in glory. Whatever he
said and taught, every word he spoke, becomes _eo ipso_ untrue
if we give it the appearance of having been spoken by Christ in
his glory. Nay, he is silent. It is the lowly Christ who speaks.
The space of time between (i.e. between his debasement and his
return in glory) which is at present about 1800 years, and will
possibly become many times 1800--this space of time, or else
what this space of time tries to make of Christ, the worldly
information about him furnished by world history or church history,
as to who Christ was, as to who it was who really spoke these
words--all this does not concern us, is neither here nor there,
but only serves to corrupt our conception of him, arid thereby
renders untrue these words of invitation.

It is untruthful of me to impute to a person words which he
never used. But it is likewise untruthful, and the words he used
likewise become untruthful, or it becomes untrue that he used
them, if I assign to him a nature essentially unlike the one
he had when he did use them. Essentially unlike; for an untruth
concerning this or the other trifling circumstance will not make
it untrue that "he" said them. And therefore, if it please God
to walk on earth in such strict incognito as only one all-powerful
can assume, in guise impenetrable to all men; if it please him--and
why he does it, for what purpose, that he knows best himself;
but whatever the reason and the purpose, it is certain that
the incognito is of essential significance--I say, if it please
God to walk on earth in the guise of a servant and, to judge
from his appearance, exactly like any other man; if it please
him to teach men in this guise--if, now, any one repeats his
very words, but gives the saying the appearance that it was
God that spoke these words: then it is untruthful; for it is
untrue that h e said these words.




_B_ Can one from history[7] learn to know anything about Christ?


No. And why not? Because one cannot "know" anything at all about
"Christ"; for he is the paradox, the object of faith, and exists
only for faith. But all historic information is communication of
"knowledge." Therefore one cannot learn anything about Christ
from history. For whether now one learn little or much about him,
it will not represent what he was in reality. Hence one learns
something else about him than what is strictly true, and therefore
learns nothing about him, or gets to know something wrong about
him; that is, one is deceived. History makes Christ look different
from what he looked in truth, and thus one learns much from history
about--Christ? No, not about Christ; because about him nothing
can be "known," he can only be believed.




_C_ Can one prove from history that Christ was God?


Let me first ask another question: is any more absurd contradiction
thinkable than wishing to prove (no matter, for the present,
whether one wishes to do so from history, or from whatever else
in the wide world one wishes to prove it) that a certain person
is God? To maintain that a certain person is God--that is, professes
to be God--is indeed a stumbling block in the purest sense. But
what is the nature of a stumbling block? It is an assertion
which is at variance with all (human) reason. Now think of proving
that! But to prove something is to render it reasonable and real.
Is it possible, then, to render reasonable and real what is at
variance with all reason? Scarcely; unless one wishes to contradict
one's self. One can prove only that it is at variance with all
reason. The proofs for the divinity of Christ given in Scripture,
such as the miracles and his resurrection from the grave exist,
too, only for faith; that is, they are no "proofs," for they are
not meant to prove that all this agrees with reason but, on the
contrary, are meant to prove that it is at variance with reason
and therefore a matter of faith.

First, then, let us take up the proofs from history. "Is it not
1800 years ago now that Christ lived, is not his name proclaimed
and reverenced throughout the world, has not his teaching (Christianity)
changed the aspect of the world, having victoriously affected
all affairs: has then history not sufficiently, or more than
sufficiently, made good its claim as to who he was, and that
he was--God?" No, indeed, history has by no means sufficiently,
or more than sufficiently, made good its claim, and in fact
history cannot accomplish this in all eternity. However, as
to the first part of the statement, it is true enough that his
name is proclaimed throughout the world--as to whether it is
reverenced, that I do not presume to decide. Also, it is true
enough that Christianity has transformed the aspect of the world,
having victoriously affected all affairs, so victoriously indeed,
that everybody now claims to be a Christian.

But what does this prove? It proves, at most, that Jesus Christ
was a great man, the greatest, perhaps, who ever lived. But that
he was God--stop now, that conclusion shall with God's help fall
to the ground.

Now, if one intends to introduce this conclusion by assuming that
Jesus Christ was a man, and then considers the 1800 years of
history (i.e. the consequences of his life), one may indeed
conclude with a constantly rising superlative: he was great,
greater, the greatest, extraordinarily and astonishingly the
greatest man who ever lived. If one begins, on the other hand,
with the assumption (of faith) that he was God, one has by so
doing stricken out and car celled the 1800 years as not making
the slightest difference, one way or the other, because the
certainty of faith is on an infinitely higher plane. And one
course or the other one must take; but we shall arrive at sensible
conclusions only if we take the latter.

If one takes the former course one will find it impossible--unless
by committing the logical error of passing over into a different
category--one will find it impossible in the conclusion suddenly
to arrive at the new category "God"; that is, one cannot make
the consequence, or consequences, of--a man's life suddenly
prove at a certain point in the argument that this man was God.
If such a procedure were correct one ought to be able to answer
satisfactorily a question like this: what must the consequence
be, how great the effects, how many centuries must elapse, in
order to infer from the consequences of a man's life--for such
was the assumption--that he was God; or whether it is really
the case that in the year 300 Christ had not yet been entirely
proved to be God, though certainly the most extraordinarily,
astonishingly, greatest man who had ever lived, but that a few
more centuries would be necessary to prove that he was God. In
that case we would be obliged to infer that people in the fourth
century did not look upon Christ as God, and still less they
who lived in the first century; whereas the certainty that he
was God would grow with every century. Also, that in our century
this certainty would be greater than it had ever been, a certainty
in comparison with which the first centuries hardly so much as
glimpsed his divinity. You may answer this question or not, it
does not matter.

In general, is it at all possible by the consideration of the
gradually unfolding consequences of something to arrive at a
conclusion different in quality from what we started with? Is
it not sheer insanity (providing man is sane) to let one's judgment
become so altogether confused as to land in the wrong category?
And if one begins with such a mistake, then how will one be able,
at any subsequent point, to infer from the consequences of something,
that one has to deal with an altogether different, in fact,
infinitely different, category? A foot-print certainly is the
consequence of some creature having made it. Now I may mistake
the track for that of, let us say, a bird; whereas by nearer
inspection, and by following it for some distance, I may make
sure that it was made by some other animal. Very good; but there
was no infinite difference in quality between my first assumption
and my later conclusion. But can I, on further consideration
and following the track still further, arrive at the conclusion:
therefore it was a spirit--a spirit that leaves no tracks? Precisely
the same holds true of the argument that from the consequences
of a human life--for that was the assumption--we may infer that
therefore it was God.

Is God then so like man, is there so little difference between
the two that, while in possession of my right senses, I may
begin with the assumption that Christ was human? And, for that
matter, has not Christ himself affirmed that he was God? On the
other hand, if God and man resemble each other so closely, and
are related to each other to such a degree--that is, essentially
belong to the same category of beings, then the conclusion "therefore
he was God" is nevertheless just humbug, because if that is all
there is to being God, then God does not exist at all. But if
God does exist and, therefore, belongs to a category infinitely
different from man, why, then neither I nor any one else can
start with the assumption that Christ was human and end with
the conclusion that therefore he was God. Any one with a bit
of logical sense will easily recognize that the whole question
about the consequences of Christ's life on earth is incommensurable
with the decision that he is God. In fact, this decision is to
be made on an altogether different plane: man must decide for
himself whether he will believe Christ to be what he himself
affirmed he was, that is, God, or whether he will not believe so.

What has been said--mind you, providing one will take the time
to understand it--is sufficient to make a logical mind stop
drawing any inferences from the consequences of Christ's life:
that therefore he was God. But faith in its own right protests
against every attempt to approach Jesus Christ by the help of
historical information about the consequences of his life. Faith
contends that this whole attempt is--blasphemous. Faith contends
that the only proof left unimpaired by unbelief when it did
away with all the other proofs of the truth of Christianity,
the proof which--indeed, this is complicated business--I say,
which unbelief invented in order to prove the truth of Christianity--the
proof about which so excessively much ado has been made in Christendom,
the proof of 1800 years: as to this, faith contends that it
is--blasphemy.

With regard to a man it is true that the consequences of his
life are more important than his life. If one, then, in order to
find out who Christ was, and in order to find out by some inference,
considers the consequences of his life: why, then one changes
him into a man by this very act--a man who, like other men, is
to pass his examination in history, and history is in this case
as mediocre an examiner as any half-baked teacher in Latin.

But strange! By the help of history, that is, by considering
the consequences of his life, one wishes to arrive at the conclusion
that therefore, therefore he was God; and faith makes the exactly
opposite contention that he who even begins with this syllogism
is guilty of blasphemy. Nor does the blasphemy consist in assuming
hypothetically that Christ was a man. No, the blasphemy consists
in the thought which lies at the bottom of the whole business,
the thought without which one would never start it, and of whose
validity one is fully and firmly assured that it will hold also
with regard to Christ--the thought that the consequences of his
life are more important than his life; in other words, that he
is a man. The hypothesis is: let us assume that Christ was a
man; but at the bottom of this hypothesis, which is not blasphemy
as yet, there lies the assumption that, the consequences of a
man's life being more important than his life, this will hold
true also of Christ. Unless this is assumed one must admit that
one's whole argument is absurd, must admit it before beginning--so
why begin at all? But once it is assumed, and the argument is
started, we have the blasphemy. And the more one becomes absorbed
in the consequences of Christ's life, with the aim of being able
to make sure whether or no he was God, the more blasphemous is
one's conduct; and it remains blasphemous so long as this consideration
is persisted in.

Curious coincidence: one tries to make it appear that, providing
one but thoroughly considers the consequences of Christ's life,
this "therefore" will surely be arrived at--and faith condemns
the very beginning of this attempt as blasphemy, and hence the
continuance in it as a worse blasphemy.

"History," says faith, "has nothing to do with Christ." With
regard to him we have only Sacred History (which is different
in kind from general history), Sacred History which tells of
his life and career when in debasement, and tells also that he
affirmed himself to be God. He is the paradox which history never
will be able to digest or convert into a general syllogism. He
is in his debasement the same as he is in his exaltation--but
the 1800 years, or let it be 18,000 years, have nothing whatsoever
to do with this. The brilliant consequences in the history of
the world which are sufficient, almost, to convince even a professor
of history that he was God, these brilliant consequences surely
do not represent his return in glory! Forsooth, in that case it
were imagined rather meanly! The same thing over again: Christ
is thought to be a man whose return in glory can be, and can become,
nothing else than the consequences of his life in history--whereas
Christ's return in glory is something absolutely different and a
matter of faith. He abased himself and was swathed in rags--he
will return in glory; but the brilliant consequences in history,
especially when examined a little more closely, are too shabby
a glory--at any rate a glory of an altogether incongruous nature,
of which faith therefore never speaks, when speaking about his
glory. History is a very respectable science indeed, only it must
not become so conceited as to take upon itself what the Father
will do, and clothe Christ in his glory, dressing him up with
the brilliant garments of the consequences of his life, as if
that constituted his return. That he was God in his debasement
and that he will return in glory, all this is far beyond the
comprehension of history; nor can all this be got from history,
excepting by an incomparable lack of logic, and however incomparable
one's view of history may be otherwise.

How strange, then, that one ever wished to use history
in order to prove Christ divine.




_D_ Are the consequences of Christ's life more important than
his life?


No, by no means, but rather the opposite; for else Christ were
but a man.

There is really nothing remarkable in a man having lived. There
have certainly lived millions upon millions of men. If the fact
is remarkable, there must have been something remarkable in a
man's life. In other words, there is nothing remarkable in his
having lived, but his life was remarkable for this or that. The
remarkable thing may, among other matters, also be what he accomplished;
that is, the consequences of his life.

But that God lived here on earth in human form, that is infinitely
remarkable. No matter if his life had had no consequences at all--it
remains equally remarkable, infinitely remarkable, infinitely more
remarkable than all possible consequences. Just try to introduce
that which is remarkable as something secondary and you will
straightway see the absurdity of doing so: now, if you please,
whatever remarkable is there in God's life having had remarkable
consequences? To speak in this fashion is merely twaddling.

No, that God lived here on earth, that is what is infinitely
remarkable, that which is remarkable in itself. Assuming that
Christ's life had had no consequences whatsoever--if any one
then undertook to say that therefore his life was not remarkable
it would be blasphemy. For it would be remarkable all the same;
and if a secondary remarkable characteristic had to be introduced
it would consist in the remarkable fact that his life had no
consequences. But if one should say that Christ's life was remarkable
because of its consequences, then this again were a blasphemy; for
it is his life which in itself is the remarkable thing.

There is nothing very remarkable in a man's having lived, but it
is infinitely remarkable that God has lived. God alone can lay
so much emphasis on himself that the fact of his having lived
becomes infinitely more important than all the consequences
which may flow therefrom and which then become a matter of history.




_E_ A comparison between Christ and a man who in his life endured
the same treatment by his times as Christ endured.


Let us imagine a man, one of the exalted spirits, one who was
wronged by his times, but whom history later reinstated in his
rights by proving by the consequences of his life who he was. I
do not deny, by the way, that all this business of proving from
the consequences is a course well suited to "a world which ever
wishes to be deceived." For he who was contemporary with him and
did not understand who he was, he really only imagines that he
understands when he has got to know it by help of the consequences
of the noble one's life. Still, I do not wish to insist on this
point, for with regard to a man it certainly holds true that
the consequences of his life are more important than the fact
of his having lived.

Let us imagine one of these exalted spirits. He lives among
his contemporaries without being understood, his significance
is not recognized--he is misunderstood, and then mocked, persecuted,
and finally put to death like a common evil-doer. But the consequences
of his life make it plain who he was; history which keeps a record
of these consequences re-instates him in his rightful position,
and now he is named in one century after another as the great and
the noble spirit, and the circumstances of his debasement are
almost completely forgotten. It was blindness on the part of his
contemporaries which prevented them from comprehending his true
nature, and wickedness which made them mock him and deride him,
and finally put him to death. But be no more concerned about this;
for only after his death did he really become what he was, through
the consequences of his life which, after all, are by far more
important than his life.

Now is it not possible that the same holds true with regard
to Christ? It was blindness and wickedness on the part of those
times[8]--but be no more concerned about this, history has now
re-instated him, from history we know now who Jesus Christ was,
and thus justice is done him.

Ah, wicked thoughtlessness which thus interprets Sacred History
like profane history, which makes Christ a man! But can one, then,
learn anything from history about Jesus? (_cf. b_) No, nothing.
Jesus Christ is the object of faith--one either believes in him
or is offended by him; for "to know" means precisely that such
knowledge does not pertain to him. History can therefore, to be
sure, give one knowledge in abundance; but "knowledge" annihilates
Jesus Christ.

Again--ah, the impious thoughtlessness!--for one to presume
to say about Christ's abasement: "Let us be concerned no more
about his abasement." Surely, Christ's abasement was not something
which merely happened to him--even if it was the sin of that
generation to crucify him; was surely not something that simply
happened to him and, perhaps, would not have happened to him in
better times. Christ himself wished to be abased and lowly. His
abasement (that is, his walking on earth in humble guise, though
being God) is therefore a condition of his own making, something
he wished to be knotted together, a dialectic knot which no one
shall presume to untie, and which no one will untie, for that
matter, until he himself shall untie it when returning in his glory.

His case is, therefore, not the same as that of a man who, through
the injustice inflicted on him by his times, was not allowed
to be himself or to be valued at his worth, while history revealed
who he was; for Christ himself wished to be abased--it is precisely
this condition which he desired. Therefore, let history not trouble
itself to do him justice, and let us not in impious thoughtlessness
presumptuously imagine that we as a matter of course know who he
was. For that no one knows; and he who believes it must become
contemporaneous with him in his abasement. When God chooses to let
himself be born in lowliness, when he who holds all possibilities
in his hand assumes the form of a humble servant, when he fares
about defenseless, letting people do with him what they list: he
surely knows what he does and why he does it; for it is at all
events he who has power over men, and not men who have power
over him--so let not history be so impertinent as to wish to
reveal who he was.

Lastly--ah the blasphemy!--if one should presume to say that
the percussion which Christ suffered expresses something accidental!
If a man is persecuted by his generation it does not follow
that he has the right to say that this would happen to him in
every age. Insofar there is reason in what posterity says about
letting bygones be bygones. But it is different with Christ!
It is not he who by letting himself be born, and by appearing
in Palestine, is being examined by history; but it is he who
examines, his life is the examination, not only of that generation,
but of mankind. Woe unto the generation that would presumptuously
dare to say: "let bygones be bygones, and forget what he suffered,
for history has now revealed who he was and has done justice by him."

If one assumes that history is really able to do this, then
the abasement of Christ bears an accidental relation to him;
that is to say, he thereby is made a man, an extraordinary man
to whom this happened through the wickedness of that generation--a
fate which he was far from wishing to suffer, for he would gladly
(as is human) have become a great man; whereas Christ voluntarily
chose to be the lowly one and, although it was his purpose to
save the world, wished also to give expression to what the "truth"
suffered then, and must suffer in every generation. But if this
is his strongest desire, and if he will show himself in his
glory only at his return, and if he has not returned as yet;
and if no generation may be without repentance, but on the contrary
every generation must consider itself a partner in the guilt of
that generation: then woe to him who presumes to deprive him of
his lowliness, or to cause what he suffered to be forgotten, and
to clothe him in the fabled human glory of the historic consequences
of his life, which is neither here nor there.




_F_ The Misfortune of Christendom


But precisely this is the misfortune, and has been the misfortune,
in Christendom that Christ is neither the one nor the other--neither
the one he was when living on earth, nor he who will return in
glory, but rather one about whom we have learned to know something
in an inadmissible way from history--that he was somebody or other
of great account. In an inadmissible and unlawful way we have
learned to know him; whereas to believe in him is the only permissible
mode of approach. Men have mutually confirmed one another in the
opinion that the sum total of information about him is available
if they but consider the result of his life and the following
1800 years, i.e. the consequences. Gradually, as this became
accepted as the truth, all pith and strength was distilled out
of Christianity; the paradox was relaxed, one became a Christian
without noticing it, without noticing in the least the possibility
of being offended by him. One took over Christ's teachings, turned
them inside out and smoothed them down--he himself guaranteeing
them, of course, the man whose life had had such immense consequences
in history! All became plain as day--very naturally, since Christianity
in this fashion became heathendom.

There is in Christendom an incessant twaddling on Sundays about
the glorious and invaluable truths of Christianity, its mild
consolation. But it is indeed evident that Christ lived 1800
years ago; for the rock of offense and object of faith has become
a most charming fairy-story character, a kind of divine good
old man.[9] People have not the remotest idea of what it means
to be offended by him, and still less, what it means to worship.
The qualities for which Christ is magnified are precisely those
which would have most enraged one, if one had been contemporaneous
with him; whereas now one feels altogether secure, placing implicit
confidence in the result and, relying altogether on the verdict
of history that he was the great man, concludes therefore that
it is correct to do so. That is to say, it is the correct, arid
the noble, and the exalted, and the true, thing--if it is he who
does it; which is to say, again, that one does not in any deeper
sense take the pains to understand what it is he does, and that
one tries even less, to the best of one's ability and with the
help of God, to be like him in acting rightly and nobly, and in
an exalted manner, and truthfully. For, not really fathoming it
in any deeper sense, one may, in the exigency of a contemporaneous
situation, judge him in exactly the opposite way. One is satisfied
with admiring and extolling and is, perhaps, as was said of a
translator who rendered his original word for word and therefore
without making sense, "too conscientious,"--one is, perhaps, also
too cowardly and too weak to wish to understand his real meaning.

Christendom has done away with Christianity, without being aware
of it. Therefore, if anything is to be done about it, the attempt
must be made to re-introduce Christianity.




II


He who invites is, then, Jesus Christ in his abasement, it is he
who spoke these words of invitation. It is not from his glory
that they are spoken. If that were the case, then Christianity
were heathendom and the name of Christ taken in vain, and for
this reason it cannot be so. But if it were the case that he who
is enthroned in glory had said these words: Come hither--as though
it were so altogether easy a matter to be clasped in the arms of
glory--well, what wonder, then, if crowds of men ran to him! But
they who thus throng to him merely go on a wild goose chase,
imagining they know who Christ is. But that no one knows; and
in order to believe in him one has to begin with his abasement.

He who invites and speaks these words, that is, he whose words
they are--whereas the same words if spoken by some one else are,
as we have seen, an historic falsification--he is the same lowly
Jesus Christ, the humble man, born of a despised maiden, whose
father is a carpenter, related to other simple folk of the very
lowest class, the lowly man who at the same time (which, to be
sure, is like oil poured on the fire) affirms himself to be God.

It is the lowly Jesus Christ who spoke these words. And no word
of Christ, not a single one, have you permission to appropriate
to yourself, you have not the least share in him, are not in any
way of his company, if you have not become his contemporary in
lowliness in such fashion that you have become aware, precisely
like his contemporaries, of his warning: "Blessed is he whosoever
shall not be offended in me.[10]" You have no right to accept
Christ's words, and then lie him away; you have no right to accept
Christ's words, and then in a fantastic manner, and with the aid
of history, utterly change the nature of Christ; for the chatter
of history about him is literally not worth a fig.

It is Jesus Christ in his lowliness who is the speaker. It
is historically true that h e said these words; but so soon as
one makes a change in his historic status, it is false to say
that these words were spoken by him.

This poor and lowly man, then, with twelve poor fellows as his
disciples, all from the lowest class of society, for some time
an object of curiosity, but later on in company only with sinners,
publicans, lepers, and madmen; for one risked honor, life, and
property, or at any rate (and that we know for sure) exclusion
from the synagogue, by even letting one's self be helped by
him--come hither now, all ye that labor and are heavy laden!
Ah, my friend, even if you were deaf and blind and lame and
leprous, if you, which has never been seen or heard before,
united all human miseries in your misery--and if he wished to
help you by a miracle: it is possible that (as is human) you
would fear more than all your sufferings the punishment which
was set on accepting aid from him, the punishment of being cast
out from the society of other men, of being ridiculed and mocked,
day after day, and perhaps of losing your life. It is human
(and it is characteristic of being human) were you to think
as follows: "no, thank you, in that case I prefer to remain deaf
and blind and lame and leprous, rather than accept aid under
such conditions."

"Come hither, come hither, all, ye that labor and are heavy
laden, ah, come hither," lo! he invites you and opens his arms.
Ah, when a gentlemanly man clad in a silken gown says this in
a pleasant, harmonious voice so that the words pleasantly resound
in the handsome vaulted church, a man in silk who radiates honor
and respect on all who listen to him; ah, when a king in purple
and velvet says this, with the Christmas tree in the background
on which are hanging all the splendid gifts he intends to distribute,
why, then of course there is some meaning in these words! But
whatever meaning you may attach to them, so much is sure that
it is not Christianity, but the exact opposite, something as
diametrically opposed to Christianity as may well be; for remember
who it is that invites!

And now judge for yourself--for that you have a right to do;
whereas men really do not have a right to do what is so often
done, viz. to deceive themselves. That a man of such appearance,
a man whose company every one shuns who has the least bit of sense
in his head, or the least bit to lose in the world, that he--well,
this is the absurdest and maddest thing of all, one hardly knows
whether to laugh or to weep about it--that he--indeed, that is
the very last word one would expect to issue from his mouth; for
if he had said: "Come hither and help me," or: "Leave me alone,"
or: "Spare me," or proudly: "I despise you all," we could understand
that perfectly--but that such a man says: "Come hither to me!" why,
I declare, that looks inviting indeed! And still further: "All
ye that labor and are heavy laden"--as though such folk were
not burdened enough with troubles, as though they now, to cap
all, should be exposed to the consequences of associating with
him. And then, finally: "I shall give you rest." What's that?--he
help them? Ah, I am sure even the most good-natured joker who
was contemporary with him would have to say: "Surely, that was
the thing he should have undertaken last of all--to wish to
help others, being in that condition himself! Why, it is about
the same as if a beggar were to inform the police that he had
been robbed. For it is a contradiction that one who has nothing,
and has had nothing, informs us that he has been robbed; and
likewise, to wish to help others when one's self needs help
most." Indeed it is, humanly speaking, the most harebrained
contradiction, that he who literally "hath not where to lay
his head," that he about whom it was spoken truly, in a human
sense, "Behold the man!"--that he should say: "Come hither unto
me all ye that suffer--I shall help!"

Now examine yourself--for that you have a right to do. You have
a right to examine yourself, but you really do not have a right
to let yourself without self-examination be deluded by "the
others" into the belief, or to delude yourself into the belief,
that you are a Christian--therefore examine yourself: supposing
you were contemporary with him! True enough he--alas! he affirmed
himself to be God! But many another madman has made that claim--and
his times gave it as their opinion that he uttered blasphemy.
Why, was not that precisely the reason why a punishment was
threatened for allowing one's self to be aided by him? It was
the godly care for their souls entertained by the existing order
and by public opinion, lest any one should be led astray: it was
this godly care that led them to persecute him in this fashion.
Therefore, before any one resolves to be helped by him, let him
consider that he must not only expect the antagonism of men,
but--consider it well!--even if you could bear the consequences
of that step--but consider well, that the punishment meted out
by men is supposed to be God's punishment of him, "the blasphemer"--of
him who invites!

Come hither now all ye that labor and are heavy laden!

How now? Surely this is nothing to run after--some little pause
is given, which is most fittingly used to go around about by way
of another street. And even if you should not thus sneak out in
some way--always providing you feel yourself to be contemporary
with him--or sneak into being some kind of Christian by belonging
to Christendom: yet there will be a tremendous pause given, the
pause which is the very condition that faith may arise: you are
given pause by the possibility of being offended in him.

But in order to make it entirely clear, and bring it home to our
minds, that the pause is given by him who invites, that it is he
who gives us pause and renders it by no means an easy, but a
peculiarly difficult, matter to follow his invitation, because
one has no right to accept it without accepting also him who
invites--in order to make this entirely clear I shall briefly
review his life under two aspects which, to be sure, show some
difference though both essentially pertain to his abasement.
For it is always an abasement for God to become man, even if
he were to be an emperor of emperors; and therefore he is not
essentially more abased because he is a poor, lowly man, mocked,
and as Scripture adds,[11] spat upon.




THE FIRST PHASE OF HIS LIFE


And now let us speak about him in a homely fashion, just as
his contemporaries spoke about him, and as one speaks about
some contemporary--let him be a man of the same kind as we are,
whom one meets on the street in passing, of whom one knows where
he lives and in what story, what his business is, who his parents
are, his family, how he looks and how he dresses, with whom he
associates, "and there is nothing extraordinary about him, he
looks as men generally look"; in short, let us speak of him as
one speaks of some contemporary about whom one does not make a
great ado; for in living life together with these thousands upon
thousands of real people there is no room for a fine distinction
like this: "Possibly, this man will be remembered in centuries to
come," and "at the same time he is really only a clerk in some
shop who is no whit better than his fellows." Therefore, let us
speak about him as contemporaries speak about some contemporary.
I know very well what I am doing; and I want you to believe that
the canting and indolent world-historic habit we have of always
reverently speaking about Christ (since one has learned all about
it from history, and has heard so much about his having been
something very extraordinary, indeed, or something of that kind)--that
reverent habit, I assure you, is not worth a row of pins but
is, rather, sheer thoughtlessness, hypocrisy, and as such blasphemy;
for it is blasphemy to reverence thoughtlessly him whom one is
either to believe in or to be offended in.

It is the lowly Jesus Christ, a humble man, born of a maiden
of low degree, whose father is a carpenter. To be sure, his
appearance is made under conditions which are bound to attract
attention to him. The small nation among whom he appears, God's
Chosen People as they call themselves, live in anticipation of
a Messiah who is to bring a golden period to land and people.
You must grant that the form in which he appears is as different
as possible from what most people would have expected. On the
other hand, his appearance corresponds more to the ancient prophecies
with which the people are thought to have been familiar. Thus
he presents himself. A predecessor has called attention to him,
and he himself fastens attention very decidedly on himself by
signs and wonders which are noised abroad in all the land--and
he is the hero of the hour, surrounded by unnumbered multitudes
of people wheresoever he fares. The sensation aroused by him
is enormous, every one's eyes are fastened on him, every one
who can go about, aye even those who can only crawl, must see
the wonder--and every one must have some opinion about him,
so that the purveyors of ready-made opinions are put to it because
the demand is so furious and the contradictions so confusing.
And yet he, the worker of miracles, ever remains the humble man
who literally hath not where to lay his head.

And let us not forget: signs and wonders as contemporary events
have a markedly greater elasticity in repelling or attracting
than the tame stories generally re-hashed by the priests, or the
still tamer stories about signs and wonders that happened--1800
years ago! Signs and wonders as contemporary events are something
plaguy and importunate, something which in a highly embarrassing
manner almost compels one to have an opinion, something which,
if one does not happen to be disposed to believe, may exasperate
one excessively by thus forcing one to be contemporaneous with it.
Indeed, it renders existence too complicated, and the more so, the
more thoughtful, developed, and cultured one is. It is a peculiarly
ticklish matter, this having to assume that a man who is contemporaneous
with one really performs signs and wonders; but when he is at some
distance from one, when the consequences of his life stimulate
the imagination a bit, then it is not so hard to imagine, in a
fashion, that one believes it.

As I said, then, the people are carried away with him; they follow
him jubilantly, and see signs and wonders, both those which he
performs and those which he does not perform, and they are glad
in their hope that the golden age will begin, once he is king.
But the crowd rarely have a clear reason for their opinions, they
think one thing today and another tomorrow. Therefore the wise
and the critical will not at once participate. Let us see now
what the wise and the critical must think, so soon as the first
impression of astonishment and surprise has subsided.

The shrewd and critical man would probably say: "Even assuming
that this person is what he claims to be, that is, something
extraordinary--for as to his affirming himself to be God I can,
of course, not consider that as anything but an exaggeration for
which I willingly make allowances, and pardon him, if I really
considered him to be something extraordinary; for I am not a
pedant--assuming then, which I hesitate to do, for it is a matter
on which I shall at any rate suspend my judgment--assuming then
that he is really performing miracles: is it not an inexplicable
mystery that this person can be so foolish, so weak-minded, so
altogether devoid of worldly wisdom, so feeble, or so good-naturedly
vain, or whatever else you please to call it--that he behaves
in this fashion and almost forces his benefactions on men? Instead
of proudly and commandingly keeping people away from himself at
a distance marked by their profoundest submission, whenever he
does allow himself to be seen, at rare occasions: instead of
doing so, think of his being accessible to every one, or rather
himself going to every one, of having intercourse with everybody,
almost as if being the extraordinary person consisted in his
being everybody's servant,[12] as if the extraordinary person
he claims to be were marked by his being concerned only lest
men should fail to be benefited by him--in short as if being
an extraordinary person consisted in being the most solicitous
of all persons. The whole business is inexplicable to me--what
he wants, what his purpose is, what end he has in mind, what he
expects to accomplish; in a word, what the meaning of it all
is. He who by so many a wise saying reveals so profound an insight
into the human heart, he must certainly know what I, using but
half of my wits, can predict for him, viz. that in such fashion
one gets nowhere in the world--unless, indeed, despising prudence,
one consistently, aims to make a fool of one's self or, perchance,
goes so far in sincerity as to prefer being put to death; but
anyone, one desiring that must certainly be crazy. Having such
profound knowledge of the human heart he certainly ought to know
that the thing to do is to deceive people and then to give one's
deception the appearance of being a benefaction conferred on
the whole race. By doing so one reaps all advantages, even the
one whose enjoyment is the sweetest of all, which is, to be called
by one's contemporaries a benefactor of the human race--for, once
in your grave, you may snap your fingers at what posterity may
have to say about you. But to surrender one's self altogether,
as he does, and not to think the least of one's self--in fact,
almost to beg people to accept these benefactions: no, I would
not dream of joining his company. And, of course, neither does he
invite me; for, indeed, he invites only them that labor and
are heavy laden."

Or he would reason as follows: "His life is simply a fantastic
dream. In fact, that is the mildest expression one can use about
it; for, when judging him in this fashion, one is good-natured
enough to forget altogether the evidence of sheer madness in his
claim to be God. This is wildly fantastical. One may possibly
live a few years of one's youth in such fashion. But he is now
past thirty years. And he is literally nothing. Still further,
in a very short time he will necessarily lose all the respect
and reputation he has gained among the people, the only thing,
you may say, he has gained for himself. One who wishes to keep
in the good graces of the people--the riskiest chance imaginable,
I will admit--he must act differently. Not many months will
pass before the crowd will grow tired of one who is so altogether
at their service. He will be regarded as a ruined person, a kind
of outcast, who ought to be glad to end his days in a corner,
the world forgetting, by the world forgot; providing he does
not, by continuing his previous behavior, prefer to maintain
his present attitude and be fantastic enough to wish to be put
to death, which is the unavoidable consequence of persevering
in that course. What has he done for his future? Nothing. Has
he any assured position? No. What expectations has he? None.
Even this trifling matter: what will he do to pass the time
when he grows older, the long winter nights, what will he do
to make them pass--why, he cannot even play cards! He is now
enjoying a bit of popular favor--in truth, of all movable property
the most movable--which in a trice may turn into an enormous
popular hatred of him.--Join his company? No, thank you, I am
still, thank God, in my right mind."

Or he may reason as follows: "That there is something extraordinary
about this person--even if one reserves the right, both one's own
and that of common sense, to refrain from venturing any opinion
as to his claim of being God--about that there is really little
doubt. Rather, one might be indignant at Providence's having
entrusted such a person with these powers--a person who does
the very opposite of what he himself bids us do: that we shall
not cast our pearls before the swine; for which reason he will,
as he himself predicts, come to grief by their turning about and
trampling him under their feet. One may always expect this of
swine; but, on the other hand, one would not expect that he who
had himself called attention to this likelihood, himself would
do precisely[13] what he knows one should not do. If only there
were some means of cleverly stealing his wisdom--for I shall
gladly leave him in undisputed possession of that very peculiar
thought of his that he is God--if one could but rob his wisdom
without, at the same time, becoming his disciple! If one could
only steal up to him at night and lure it from him; for I am
more than equal to editing and publishing it, and better than
he, if you please. I undertake to astonish the whole world by
getting something altogether different out of it; for I clearly
see there is something wondrously profound in what he says, and
the misfortune is only that he is the man he is. But perhaps,
who knows, perhaps it is feasible, anyway, to fool him out of
it. Perhaps in that respect too he is good-natured and simple
enough to communicate it quite freely to me. It is not impossible;
for it seems to me that the wisdom he unquestionably possesses,
evidently has been entrusted to a fool, seeing there is so much
contradiction in his life.--But as to joining his company and
becoming his disciple--no, indeed, that would be the same as
becoming'a fool oneself." Or he might reason as follows: "If
this person does indeed mean to further what is good and true
(I do not venture to decide this), he is helpful at least, in
this respect, to youths and inexperienced people. For they will
be benefited, in this serious life of ours, by learning, the
sooner the better, and very thoroughly--he opens the eyes even
of the blindest to this--that all this pretense of wishing to
live only for goodness and truth contains a considerable admixture
of the ridiculous. He proves how right the poets of our times
are when they let truth and goodness be represented by some
half-witted fellow, one who is so stupid that you can knock
down a wall with him. The idea of exerting one's self, as this
man does, of renouncing everything but pains and trouble, to be
at beck and call all day long, more eager than the busiest family
physician--and pray why? Because he makes a living by it? No, not
in the very least; it has never occurred to him, as far as I
can see, to want something in return. Does he earn any money by
it? No, not a red cent--he has not a red cent to his name, and
if he did he would forthwith give it away. Does he, then, aspire
to a position of honor and dignity in the state? On the contrary,
he loathes all worldly honor. And he who, as I said, condemns
all worldly honor, and practices the art of living on nothing;
he who, if any one, seems best fitted to pass his life in a most
comfortable _dolce far niente_--which is not such a bad thing--:
he lives under a greater strain than any government official who
is rewarded by honor and dignity, lives under a greater strain
than any business man who earns money like sand. Why does he
exert himself thus, or (why this question about a matter not
open to question?) why should any one exert himself thus--in
order to attain to the happiness of being ridiculed, mocked,
and so forth? To be sure, a peculiar kind of pleasure! That one
should push one's way through a crowd to reach the spot where
money, honor, and glory are distributed--why, that is perfectly
understandable; but to push forward to be whipped: how exalted,
how Christian, how stupid!"

Or he will reason as follows: "One hears so many rash opinions
about this person from people who understand nothing--and worship
him; and so many severe condemnations of him by those who, perhaps,
misunderstand him after all. As for me, I am not going to allow
myself to be accused of venturing a hasty opinion. I shall keep
entirely cool and calm; in fact, which counts for still more, I
am conscious of being as reasonable and moderate with him as is
possible. Grant now--which, to be sure. I do only to a certain
extent--grant even that one's reason is impressed by this person.
What, then, is my opinion about him? My opinion is, that for the
present, I can form no opinion about him. I do not mean about his
claim of being God; for about that I can never in all eternity
have an opinion. No, I mean about him as a man. Only by the
consequences of his life shall we be able to decide whether
he was an extraordinary person or whether, deceived by his imagination,
he applied too high a standard, not only to himself, but also to
humanity in general. More I cannot do for him, try as I may--if
he were my only friend, my own child, I could not judge him more
leniently, nor differently, either. It follows from this, to be
sure, that in all probability, and for good reasons, I shall
not ever be able to have any opinion about him. For in order to
be able to form an opinion I must first see the consequences of
his life, including his very last moments; that is, he must be
dead. Then, and perhaps not even then, may I form an opinion of
him. And even granting this, it is not really an opinion about
him, for he is then no more. No more is needed to say why it is
impossible for me to join him while he is living. The authority
he is said to show in his teaching can have no decisive influence
in my case; for it is surely easy to see that his thought moves
in a circle. He quotes as authority that which he is to prove,
which in its turn can be proved only by the consequences of his
life; provided, of course, it is not connected with that fixed
idea of his about being God, because if it is therefore he has
this authority (because he is God) the answer must be: yes--if!
So much, however, I may admit, that if I could imagine myself
self living in some later age, and if the consequences of his
life as shown in history had made it plain that he was the extraordinary
person he in a former age claimed to be, then it might very well
be--in fact, I might come very near, becoming his disciple."

An ecclesiastic would reason as follows: "For an impostor and
demagogue he has, to say the truth, a remarkable air of honesty
about him; for which reason he cannot be so absolutely dangerous,
either, even though the situation looks dangerous enough while
the squall is at its height, and even though the situation looks
dangerous enough with his enormous popularity--until the squall
has passed over and the people--yes, precisely the people--overthrow
him again. The honest thing about him is his claim to be the
Messiah when he resembles him so little as he does. That is honest,
just as if some one in preparing bogus paper-money made the bills
so poorly that every one who knows the least about it cannot fail
to detect the fraud.--True enough, we all look forward to a
Messiah, but surely no one with any sense expects God himself
to come, and every religious person shudders at the blasphemous
attitude of this person. We look forward to a Messiah, we are all
agreed on that. But the governance of the world does not go forward
tumultuously, by leaps and bounds; the development of the world,
as is indicated by the very fact that it is a development, proceeds
by evolution, not by revolution. The true Messiah will therefore
look quite different, and will arrive as the most glorious flower,
and the highest development, of that which already exists. Thus
will the true Messiah come, and he will proceed in an entirely
different fashion: he will recognize the existing order as the
basis of things, he will summon all the clergy to council and
present to them the results accomplished by him, as well as his
credentials--and then, if he obtain the majority of the votes
when the ballot is cast, he will be received and saluted as the
extraordinary person, as the one he is: the Messiah.[14]

"However, there is a duplicity in this man's behavior; he assumes
too much the role of judge. It seems as if he wished to be, at
one and the same time, both the judge who passes sentence on the
existing order of things, and the Messiah. If he does not wish
to play the role of the judge, then why his absolute isolation,
his keeping at a distance from all which has to do with the
existing order of things? And if he does not wish to be the
judge, then why his fantastic flight from reality to join the
ignorant crowd, then why with the haughtiness of a revolutionary
does he despise all the intelligence and efficiency to be found
in the existing order of things? And why does he begin afresh
altogether, and absolutely from the bottom up, by the help of--fishermen
and artisans? May not the fact that he is an illegitimate child
fitly characterize his entire relation to the existing order
of things? On the other hand, if he wishes to be only the Messiah,
why then his warning about putting a piece of new cloth unto an
old garment.[15] For these words are precisely the watchwords
of every revolution since they are expressive of a person's
discontent with the existing order and of his wish to destroy
it. That is, these words reveal his desire to remove existing
conditions, rather than to build on them and better them, if
one is a reformer, or to develop them to their highest possibility,
if one is indeed the Messiah. This is duplicity. In fact, it is
not feasible to be both judge and Messiah. Such duplicity will
surely result in his downfall.[16] The climax in the life of a
judge is his death by violence, and so the poet pictures it
correctly; but the climax in the life of the Messiah cannot
possibly be his death. Or else, by that very fact, he would
not be the Messiah, that is, he whom the existing order expects
in order to deify him. This duplicity has not as yet been recognized
by the people, who see in him their Messiah; but the existing
order of things cannot by any manner of means recognize him as
such. The people, the idle and loafing crowd, can do so only
because they represent nothing less than the existing order
of things. But as soon as the duplicity becomes evident to them,
his doom is sealed. Why, in this respect his predecessor was
a far more definitely marked personality, for he was but one
thing, the judge. But what confusion and thoughtlessness, to wish
to be both, and what still worse confusion, to acknowledge his
predecessor as the judge--that is, in other words, precisely to
make the existing order of things receptive and ripe for the
Messiah who is to come after the judge, and yet not wish to
associate himself with the existing order of things!"

And the philosopher would reason as follows: "Such dreadful
or, rather, insane vanity, that a single individual claims to
be God, is a thing hitherto unheard of. Never before have we
been witness to such an excess of pure subjectivity and sheer
negation. He has no doctrines, no system of philosophy, he knows
really nothing, he simply keeps on repeating, and making variations
on, some unconnected aphoristic sentences, some few maxims, and
a couple of parables by which he dazzles the crowd for whom he
also performs signs and wonders; so that they, instead of learning
something, or being improved, come to believe in one who in a
most brazen way constantly forces his subjective views on us.
There is nothing objective or positive whatever in him and in
what he says. Indeed, from a philosophical point of view, he
does not need to fear destruction for he has perished already,
since it is inherent in the nature of subjectivity to perish.
One may in all fairness admit that his subjectivity is remarkable
and that, be it as it may with the other miracles, he constantly
repeats his miracle with the five small loaves,[17] viz., by
means of a few lyric utterances and some aphorisms he rouses
the whole country. But even if one were inclined to overlook
his insane notion of affirming himself to be God, it is an
incomprehensible mistake, which, to be sure, demonstrates a
lack of philosophic training, to believe that God could reveal
himself in the form of an individual. The race, the universal,
the total, is God; but the race surely is not an individual!
Generally speaking, that is the impudent assumption of subjectivity,
which claims that the individual is something extraordinary.
But sheer insanity is shown in the claim of an individual to
be God. Because if the insane thing were possible, viz. that
an individual might be God, why, then this individual would
have to be worshipped, and a more beastly philosophic stupidity
is not conceivable."

The astute statesman would reason as follows: "That at present
this person wields great power is undeniable--entirely disregarding,
of course, this notion of his that he is God. Foibles like these,
being idiosyncrasies, do not count against a man and concern no
one, least of all a statesman. A statesman is concerned only
with what power a man wields; and that he does wield great power
cannot, as I have remarked, be denied. But what he intends to do,
what his aim is, I cannot make out at all. If this be calculation
it must be of an entirely new and peculiar order, not so altogether
unlike what is otherwise called madness. He possesses points of
considerable strength; but he seems to defeat, rather than to
use, it; he expends it without himself getting any returns. I
consider him a phenomenon with which--as ought to be one's rule
with all phenomena--a wise man should not have anything to do,
since it is impossible to calculate him or the catastrophe threatening
his life. It is possible that he will be made king. It is possible,
I say; but it is not impossible, or rather, it is just as possible,
that he may end on the gallows. He lacks earnestness in all his
endeavors. With all his enormous stretch of wings he only hovers
and gets nowhere. He does not seem to have any definite plan of
procedure, but just hovers. Is it for his nationality he is fighting,
or does he aim at a communistic revolution? Does he wish to establish
a republic or a kingdom? With which party does he affiliate
himself to combat which party, or does he wish to fight all
parties?

"I have anything to do with him?--No, that would be the very
last thing to enter my mind. In fact, I take all possible precautions
to avoid him. I keep quiet, undertake nothing, act as if I did
not exist; for one cannot even calculate how he might interfere
with one's undertakings, be they ever so unimportant, or at any
rate, how one might become involved in the vortex of his activities.
Dangerous, in a certain sense enormously dangerous, is this
man. But I calculate that I may ensnare him precisely by doing
nothing. For overthrown he must be. And this is done most; safely
by letting him do it himself, by letting him stumble over himself.
I have, at least at this moment, not sufficient power to bring
about his fall; in fact, I know no one who has. To undertake the
least thing against him now, means to be crushed one's self. No,
my plan is constantly to exert only negative resistance to him,
that is, to do nothing, and he will probably involve himself
in the enormous consequences he draws after him, till in the
end he will tread on his own train, as it were, and thus fall."

And the steady citizen would reason as follows (which would
then become the opinion of his family): "Now, let us be human,
everything is good when done in moderation, too little and too
much spoil everything, and as a French saying has it which I
once heard a traveling salesman use: every power which exceeds
itself comes to a fall--and as to this person, his fall is certainly
sure enough. I have earnestly spoken to my son and warned and
admonished him not to drift into evil ways and join that person.
And why? Because all people are running after him. That is to
say, what sort of people? Idlers and loafers, street-walkers and
tramps, who run after everything. But mightily few of the men
who have house and property, and nobody who is wise and respected,
none after whom I set my clock, neither councillor Johnson, nor
senator Anderson, nor the wealthy broker Nelson--oh no! they
know what's what. And as to the ministry who ought to know most
about such matters--ah, they will have none of him. What was it
pastor Green said in the club the other evening? 'That man will
yet come to a terrible end,' he said. And Green, he can do more
than preach, you oughtn't to hear him Sundays in church so much
as Mondays in the club--I just wished I had half his knowledge
of affairs! He said quite correctly, and as if spoken out of
my own heart: 'Only idlers and loafers are running after that
man.' And why do they run after him? Because he performs some
miracles. But who is sure they are miracles, or that he can
confer the same power on his disciples? And, in any case, a
miracle is something mightily uncertain, whereas the certain
is the certain. Every serious father who has grown-up children
must be truly alarmed lest his sons be seduced and join that
man together with the desperate characters who follow him--desperate
characters who have nothing to lose. And even these, how does
he help them? Why, one must be mad to wish to be helped in this
fashion. Even the poorest beggar is brought to a worse estate
than his former one, is brought to a pass he could have escaped
by remaining what he was, that is, a beggar and no more."

And the mocker, not the one hated on account of his malice, but
the one who is admired for his wit and liked for his good nature,
he would reason as follows: "It is, after all, a rich idea which
is going to prove useful to all of us, that an individual who
is in no wise different from us claims to be God. If that is
not being a benefactor of the race then I don't know what charity
and beneficence are. If we assume that the characteristic of
being God--well, who in all the world would have hit on that
idea? How true that such an idea could not have entered into
the heart of man[18]--but if we assume that it consists in looking
in no wise different from the rest of us, and in nothing else:
why, then we are all gods. Q. E. D. Three cheers for him, the
inventor of a discovery so extraordinarily important for mankind!
Tomorrow I, the undersigned, shall proclaim that I am God, and
the discoverer at least will not be able to contradict me without
contradicting himself. At night all cats are gray; and if to
be God consists in looking like the rest of us, absolutely and
altogether like the rest of mankind: why, then it is night and
we all are..., or what is it I wanted to say: we all are God,
every one of us, and no one has a right to say he isn't as well
off as his neighbor. This is the most ridiculous situation imaginable,
the contradiction here being the greatest imaginable, and a
contradiction always making for a comical effect. But this is
in no wise my discovery, but solely that of the discoverer:
this idea that a man of exactly the same appearance as the rest
of us, only not half so well dressed as the average man, that
is, a poorly dressed person who, rather than being God, seems
to invite the attention of the society for the relief of the
poor--that he is God! I am only sorry for the director of the
charitable society that he will not get a raise from this general
advancement of the human race but that he will, rather, lose
his job on account of this, etc."

Ah, my friend, I know well what I am doing, I know my responsibility,
and my soul is altogether assured of the correctness of my procedure.
Now then, imagine yourself a contemporary of him who invites.
Imagine yourself to be a sufferer, but consider well to what you
expose yourself in becoming his disciple and following him. You
expose yourself to losing practically everything in the eyes of
all wise and sensible and respected men. He who invites demands
of you that you surrender all, give up everything; but the common
sense of your own times and of your contemporaries will not give
you up, but will judge that to join him is madness. And mockery
will descend cruelly upon you; for while it will almost spare him,
out of compassion, you will be thought madder than a march-hare
for becoming his disciple. People will say: "That h e is a wrong-headed
enthusiast, that can't be helped. Well and good; but to become--in
all seriousness--his disciple, that is the greatest piece of
madness imaginable. There surely is but one possibility of being
madder than a madman, which is the higher madness of joining
a madman in all seriousness and regarding him as a sage."

Do not say that the whole presentation above is exaggerated.
Ah, you know (but, possibly, have not fully realized it) that
among all the respectable men, among all the enlightened and
sensible men, there was but one--though it is easily possible
that one or the other of them, impelled by curiosity, entered
into conversation with him--that there was but one among them
who sought him in all seriousness.[19] And he came to him--in
the night! And as you know, in the night one walks on forbidden
paths, one chooses the night to go to places of which one does
not like to be known as a frequenter. Consider the opinion of
the inviter implied in this--it was a disgrace to visit him,
something no man of honor could afford to do, as little as to
pay a nightly visit to--but no, I do not care to say in so many
words what would follow this "as little as."

Come hither to me now all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest.




THE SECOND PHASE OF HIS LIFE


His end was what all the wise and the sensible, the statesmen and
the citizens and the mockers, etc., predicted it would be. And as
was later spoken to him, in a moment when, it would seem, the
most hardened ought to have been moved to sympathy, and the very
stones to tears: "He saved others; let him save himself,[20]"
and as it has been repeated thousands upon thousands of times,
by thousands upon thousands: "What was it he spoke of before,
saying his hour was not yet come[21]--is it come now, perchance?"--It
has been repeated, alas, the while the single individual, the
believer, shudders whenever considering--while yet unable to
refrain from gazing into the depth of what to men is a meaningless
absurdity--shudders when considering that God in human guise,
that his divine teaching, that these signs and wonders which
might have made a very Sodom and Gomorrha reform its ways, in
reality produced the exact opposite, and caused the teacher
to be shunned, hated, despised.

Who he is, one can recognize more easily now when the powerful
ones and the respected ones, and all the precautionary measures
of those upholding the existing order, have corrected any wrong
conception one might have entertained about him at first--now
when the people have lost their patience to wait for a Messiah,
seeing that his life, instead of rising in dignity, lapsed into
ever greater degradation. Who, pray, does not recognize that a
man is judged according to the society in which he moves--and
now, think of his society! Indeed, his society one might well
designate as equivalent to being expelled from "human society";
for his society are the lowest classes of the people, with sinners
and publicans among them, people whom everybody with the slightest
self-respect shuns for the sake of his good name and reputation--and
a good name and reputation surely are about the least one can
wish to preserve. In his company there are, furthermore, lepers
whom every one flees, madmen who can only inspire terror, invalids
and wretches--squalor and misery. Who, then, is this person
that, though followed by such a company, still is the object
of the persecution of the mighty ones? He is one despised as
a seducer of men, an impostor, a blasphemer! And if any one
enjoying a good reputation refrains from expressing contempt
of him, it is really only a kind of compassion; for to fear
him is, to be sure, something different.

Such, then, is his appearance; for take care not to be influenced
by anything that you may have learned after the event--as, how
his exalted spirit, with an almost divine majesty, never was
so markedly manifest as just them. Ah, my friend, if you were
the contemporary of one who is not only himself "excluded from
the synagogue" but, as you will remember, whose very help meant
being "excluded from the synagogue"--I say, if you were the
contemporary of an outcast, who in every respect answers to
that term, (for everything has two sides): then you will scarcely
be the man to explain all this in terms directly contrary to
appearances;[22] or, which is the same thing, you will not be
the "single individual" which, as you well know, no one wants
to be, and to be which is regarded as a ridiculous oddity, perhaps
even as a crime.

And now--for they are his society chiefly--as to his apostles!
What absurdity; though not--what new absurdity, for it is quite
in keeping with the rest--his apostles are some fishermen, ignorant
people who but the other day followed their trade. And tomorrow,
to pile one absurdity on the other, they are to go out into the
wide world and transform its aspect. And it is he who claims to
be God, and these are his duly appointed apostles! Now, is he to
make his apostles respected, or are perhaps the apostles to make
him respected? Is he, the inviter, is he an absurd dreamer?
Indeed, his procession would make it seem so; no poet could
have hit on a better idea. A teacher, a sage, or whatever you
please to call him, a kind of stranded genius, who affirms himself
to be God--surrounded by a jubilant mob, himself accompanied by
some publicans, criminals, and lepers; nearest to him a chosen
few, his apostles. And these judges so excellently competent as
to what truth is, these fishermen, tailors, and shoe-makers,
they do not only admire him, their teacher and master, whose
every word is wisdom and truth: they do not only see what no
one else can see, his exaltedness and holiness, nay, but they
see God in him and worship him. Certainly, no poet could invent
a better situation, and it is doubtful if the poet would not
forget the additional item that this same person is feared by
the mighty ones and that they are scheming to destroy him. His
death alone can reassure and satisfy them. They have set an
ignominious punishment on joining his company, on merely accepting
aid from him; and yet they do not feel secure, and cannot feel
altogether reassured that the whole thing is mere wrong-headed
enthusiasm and absurdity. Thus the mighty ones. The populace
who had Idolized him, the populace have pretty nearly given
him up, only in moments does their old conception of him blaze
forth again. In all his existence there is not a shred the most
envious of the envious might envy him to have. Nor do the mighty
ones envy his life. They demand his death for safety's sake, so
that they may have peace again, when all has returned to the
accustomed ways, peace having been made still more secure by
the warning example of his death.


These are the two phases of his life. It began with the people's
idolizing him, whereas all who were identified with the existing
order of things, all who had power and influence, vengefully,
but in a cowardly and hidden manner, laid their snares for him--in
which he was caught, then? Yes, but he perceived it well. Finally
the people discover that they had been deceived in him, that
the fulfillment he would bring them answered least of all to
their expectations of wonders and mountains of gold. So the
people deserted him and the mighty ones drew the snare about
him--in which he was caught, then? Yes, but he perceived it
well. The mighty ones drew the snare together about him--and
thereupon the people, who then saw themselves completely deceived,
turned against him in hatred and rage.

And--to include that too--compassion would say; or, among the
compassionate ones--for compassion is sociable, and likes to
assemble together, and you will find spitefulness and envy keeping
company with whining soft-headedness: since, as a heathen philosopher
observed long ago, no one is so ready to sympathize as an envious
person--among the compassionate ones the verdict would be: it is
really too bad that this good-hearted fellow is to come to such
an end. For he was really a good sort of fellow. Granting it was
an exaggeration to claim to be God, he really was good to the
poor and the needy, even if in an odd manner, by becoming one of
them and going about in the company of beggars. But there is
something touching in it all, and one can't help but feel sorry
for the poor fellow who is to suffer such a miserable death.
For you may say what you will, and condemn him as strongly as
you will, I cannot help feeling pity for him. I am not so heard-hearted
as not to feel compassion.

We have arrived at the last phase, not of Sacred History, as
handed down by the apostles and disciples who believed in Christ,
but of profane history, its counterpart.

Come hither now, all ye that labor and are heavy laden; that is,
if you feel the need, even if you are of all sufferers the most
miserable--if you feel the need of being helped in this fashion,
that is, to fall into still greater suffering, then come hither,
he will help you.




III




THE INVITATION AND THE INVITER


Let us forget for a little while what, in the strictest sense,
constitutes the "offense"; which is, that the inviter claims
to be God. Let us assume that he did not claim to be more than
a man, and let us then consider the inviter and his invitation.


The invitation is surely inviting enough. How, then, shall one
explain the bad relation which did exist, this terribly wrong
relation, that no one, or practically no one, accepted the invitation;
that, on the contrary, all, or practically all--alas! and was
it not precisely all who were invited?--that practically all
were at one in offering resistance to the inviter, in wishing
to put him to death, and in setting a punishment on accepting
aid from him? Should one not expect that after an invitation
such as he issued all, all who suffered, would come crowding
to him, and that all they who were not suffering would crowd
to him, touched by the thought of such compassion and mercy,
and that thus the whole race would be at one in admiring and
extolling the inviter? How is the opposite to be explained?
For that this was the outcome is certain enough; and the fact
that it all happened in those remote times is surely no proof
that the generation then living was worse than other generations!
How could any one be so thoughtless as to believe that? For
whoever gives any thought to the matter will easily see that
it happened in that generation only because they chanced to
be contemporaneous with him. How then explain that it happened--that
all came to that terribly wrong end, so opposite to what ought
to have been expected?

Well, in the first place, if the inviter had looked the figure
which purely human compassion would have him be; and, in the
second place, if he had entertained the purely human conception
of what constitutes man's misery--why, then it would probably
not have happened.

In the first place: According to this human conception of him
he should have been a most generous and sympathetic person, and
at the same time possessed of all qualifications requisite for
being able to help in all troubles of this world, ennobling the
help thus extended by a profound and heartfelt human compassion.
Withal (so they would imagine him) he should also have been a
man of some distinction and not without a certain amount of
human self-assertion--the consequence of which would be, however,
that he would neither have been able, in his compassion, to
reach down to all sufferers, nor yet to have comprehended fully
what constitutes the misery of man and of mankind.

But divine compassion, the infinite unconcern which takes thought
only of those that suffer, and not in the least of one's self,
and which with absolute unconcern takes thought of all that suffer:
that will always seem to men only a kind of madness, and they will
ever be puzzled whether to laugh or to weep about it. Even if
nothing else had militated against the inviter, this alone would
have been sufficient to make his lot hard in the world.

Let a man but try a little while to practice divine compassion,
that is, to be somewhat unconcerned in his compassion, and you
will at once perceive what the opinion of mankind would be.
For example: let one who could occupy some higher rank in society,
let him not (preserving all the while the distinction of his
position) lavishly give to the poor, and philanthropically (i.e.
in a superior fashion) visit the poor and the sick and the wretched--no,
let him give up altogether the distinction of his position and
in all earnest choose the company of the poor and the lowly,
let him live altogether with the people, with workmen, hodmen,
mortar-mixers, and the like! Ah, in a quiet moment, when not
actually beholding him, most of us will be moved to tears by
the mere thought of it; but no sooner would they see him in
this company--him who might have attained to honor and dignity
in the world--see him walking along in such goodly company,
with a bricklayer's apprentice on his right side and a cobbler's
boy on his left, but--well, what then? First they would devise
a thousand explanations to explain that it is because of queer
notions, or obstinacy, or pride, or vanity that he chooses this
mode of life. And even if they would refrain from attributing
to him these evil motives they will never be reconciled with
the sight of him--in this company. The noblest person in the
world will be tempted to laugh, the moment he sees it.

And if all the clergymen in the world, whether in velvet or
in silk or in broadcloth or in satin, contradicted me I would
say: "You lie, you only deceive people with your Sunday sermons.
Because it will always be possible for a contemporary to say
about one so compassionate (who, it is to be kept in mind, is
our contemporary): I believe he is actuated by vanity, and
that is why I laugh and mock at him; but if he were truly compassionate,
or had I been contemporary with him, the noble one--why then!"
And now, as to those exalted ones "who were not understood by
men"--to speak in the fashion of the usual run of sermons--why,
sure enough, they are dead. In this fashion these people succeed
in playing hide and seek. You simply assume that every contemporary
who ventures out so far is actuated only by vanity; and as to
the departed, you assume that they are dead and that they, therefore,
were among the glorious ones.

It must be remembered, to be sure, that every person wishes
to maintain his own level in life, and this fixed point, this
steady endeavor, is one of the causes which limit human compassion
to a certain sphere. The cheese-monger will think that to live
like the inmate of a poorhouse is going too far in expressing
one's sympathy; for the sympathy of the cheese-monger is biased
in one regard which is, his regard of the opinion of other cheese-mongers
and of the saloon-keepers. His compassion is therefore not without
its limitations. And thus with every class--and the journalists,
living as they do on the pennies of the poor, under the pretense
of asserting and defending their rights, they would be the first
to heap ridicule on this unlimited compassion.

To identify one's self wholly and literally with him who is
most miserable (and this, only this, is divine compassion),
that is to men the "too much" by which one is moved to tears,
in a quiet Sunday hour, and about which one unconsciously bursts
into laughter when one sees it in reality. The fact is, it is
too exalted a sight for daily use; one must have it at some
distance to be able to support it. Men are not so familiar with
exalted virtue to believe it at once. The contradiction seen
here is, therefore, that this exalted virtue manifests itself
in--reality, in daily life, quite literally the daily life.
When the poet or the orator illustrates this exalted virtue,
that is, pictures it in a poetical distance from real life,
men are moved; but to see this exalted virtue in reality, the
reality of daily life, here in Copenhagen, on the Market Square,
in the midst of busy every-day life--! And when the poet or
the orator does touch people it is only for a short time, and
just so long are men able to believe, almost, in this exalted
virtue. But to see it in real life every day--! To be sure,
there is an enormous contradiction in the statement that the
most exalted of all has become the most every-day occurrence!

Insofar, then, it was certain in advance what would be the inviter's
fate, even if nothing else had contributed to his doom. The
absolute,[23] or all which makes for an absolute standard, becomes
by that very fact the victim. For men are willing enough to
practice sympathy and self-denial, are willing enough to strive
for wisdom, etc.; but they wish themselves to determine the
standard and to have that read: "to a certain degree." They do
not wish to do away with all these splendid virtues. On the
contrary, they want--at a bargain and in all comfort--to have
the appearance and the name of practicing them. Truly divine
compassion is therefore necessarily the victim so soon as it
shows itself in this world. It descends on earth out of compassion
for mankind, and yet it is mankind who trample upon it. And
whilst it is wandering about among them, scarcely even the sufferer
dares to flee to it, for fear of mankind. The fact is, it is
most important for the world to keep up the appearance of being
compassionate; but this it made out by divine compassion to
be a falsehood--and therefore: away with divine compassion!

But now the inviter represented precisely this divine compassion--and
therefore he was sacrificed, and therefore even those that suffered
fled from him; for they comprehended (and, humanly speaking, very
exactly), what is true of most human infirmities, that one is better
off to remain what one is than to be helped by him.

In the second place: the inviter likewise had an other, and
altogether different, conception than the purely human one as
to what constitutes man's misery. And in this sense only he
was intent on helping; for he had with him neither money, nor
medicine, nor anything else of this kind.

Indeed, the inviter's appearance is so altogether different
from what human compassion wold imagine it that he is a downright
offense to men. In a purely human sense there is something positively
cruel--something outrageous, something so exasperating as to make
one wish to kill that person--in the fact of his inviting to
him the poor and the sick and the suffering, and then not being
able to do anything for them, except to promise them remission
of their sins. "Let us be human, man is no spirit. And when a
person is about to die of starvation and you say to him: I promise
you the gracious remission of your sins--that is revolting cruelty.
In fact it is ridiculous, though too serious a matter to laugh about."

Well (for in quoting these sentiments I wish merely to let offended
man discover the contradiction and exaggerate it--it is not I who
wish to exaggerate), well then, the real intention of the inviter
was to point out that sin is the destruction of mankind. Behold
now, that makes room, as the invitation also made room, almost
as if he had said _procul, o procul este profani_, or as if,
even though he had not said it, a voice had been heard which
thus interpreted the "come hither" of the invitation. There
surely are not many sufferers who will follow the invitation.
And even if there were one who, although aware that from this
inviter no actual wordily help was to be expected, nevertheless
had sought refuge with him, touched by his compassion: now even
he will flee from him. For is it not almost a bit of sharp practice
to profess to be here out of compassion, and then to speak about sin?

Indeed, it is a piece of cunning, unless you are altogether
certain that you are a sinner. If it is tooth-ache which bothers
you, or if your house is burned to the ground, but if it has
escaped you that you are a sinner--why, then it was cunning on
his part. It is a bit of sharp practice of him to assert: "I
heal all manner of disease," in order to say, when one approaches
him: "the fact is, I recognize only one disease, which is sin--of
that I shall cure all them 'that labor and are heavy laden,' all
them that labor to work themselves free of the power of sin, that
labor to resist the evil, and to vanquish their weakness, but
succeed only in being laden." Of this malady he cures "all"
persons; even if there were but a single one who turned to him
because of this malady: he heals all persons. But to come to
him on account of any other disease, and only because of that,
is about as useful as to look up an eye-doctor when you have
fractured your leg.




CHRISTIANITY AS THE ABSOLUTE; CONTEMPORANEOUSNESS WITH CHRIST


With its invitation to all "that labor and are heavy laden" Christianity
has entered the world, not--as the clergy whimperingly and falsely
introduce it--as a shining paragon of mild grounds of consolation;
but as the absolute. God wills it so because of His love, but it
is God who wills it, and He wills it as He wills it. He does not
choose to have His nature changed by man and become a nice, that
is to say, humane, God; but He chooses to change the nature
of man because of His love for them. Neither does He care to
hear any human impertinence concerning the why and wherefore
of Christianity, and why it entered the world: it is, and is
to be, the absolute. Therefore all the relative explanations
which may have been ventured as to its why and wherefore are
entirely beside the point. Possibly, these explanations were
suggested by a kind of human compassion which believes it necessary
to haggle a bit--God very likely does not know the nature of
man very well, His demands are a bit exorbitant, and therefore
the clergymen must haggle and beat Him down a bit.[24] Maybe
the clergy hit upon that idea in order to stand well with men
and reap some advantage from preaching the gospel; for if its
demands are reduced to the purely human, to the demands which
arise in man's heart, why, then men will of course think well
of it, and of course also of the amiable preacher who knows
how to make Christianity so mild--if the Apostles had been able
to do that the world would have esteemed them highly also in
their time. However, all this is the absolute. But what is it
good for, then--is it not a downright torment? Why, yes, you
may say so: from the standpoint of the relative, the absolute
is the greatest torment. In his dull, languid, sluggish moments,
when man is dominated by his sensual nature, Christianity is
an absurdity to him since it is not commensurable with any definite
"wherefore?" But of what use is it, then? Answer: peace! it is
the absolute. And thus it must be represented; that is, in a
fashion which makes it appear as an absurdity to the sensual
nature of man. And therefore is it, ah, so true and, in still
another sense, so true when the worldly-wise man who is contemporaneous
with Christ condemns him with the words: "he is literally nothing"--quite
true, for he is the absolute. And, being absolute, Christianity
has come in the world, not as a consolation in the human sense:
in fact, quite on the contrary, it is ever reminding one how
the Christian must suffer in order to become, or to remain, a
Christian--sufferings which he may, if you please, escape by
not electing to be a Christian.

There is, indeed, an unbridgeable gulf fixed between God and
man. It therefore became plain to those contemporary with Christ
that the process of becoming a Christian (that is, being changed
into the likeness of God) is, in a human sense, a greater torment
and wretchedness and pain than the greatest conceivable human
suffering, and moreover a crime in the eyes of one's contemporaries.
And thus will it always be; that is, if becoming a Christian in
reality means becoming contemporaneous with Christ. And if becoming
a Christian does not have that meaning, then all your chatter
about becoming a Christian is a vanity, a delusion and a snare,
and likewise a blasphemy and a sin against the Holy Ghost.

For with regard to the absolute there is but one time, viz. the
present. He who is not contemporaneous with the absolute, for
him it does not exist at all. And since Christ is the absolute,
it is evident that in respect of him there is but one situation:
contemporaneousness. The three, or seven, or fifteen, or seventeen,
or eighteen hundred years which have elapsed since his death do
not make the least difference, one way or the other. They neither
change him nor reveal, either, who he was; for his real nature
is revealed only to faith.

Christ, let me say so with the utmost seriousness, is not an
actor; neither is he a merely historical personage since, being
the paradox, he is an extremely unhistorical personage. But
precisely this is the difference between poetry and reality:
contemporaneousness.[25] The difference between poetry and history
is no doubt this, that history is what has really happened, and
poetry, what is possible, the action which is supposed to have
taken place, the life which has taken form in the poet's imagination.
But that which really happened (the past) is not necessarily
reality, except in a certain sense, viz., in contrast with poetry.
There is still lacking in it the criterion of truth (as inwardness)
and of all religion, there is still lacking the criterion: the
truth FOR YOU. That which is past is not a reality--for me,
but only my time is. That which you are contemporaneous with,
that is reality--for you. Thus every person has the choice to
be contemporaneous with the age in which he is living--and also
with one other period, with that of Christ's life here on earth;
for Christ's life on earth, or Sacred History, stands by itself,
outside of history.

History you may read and hear about as a matter of the past.
Within its realm you can, if you so care, judge actions by their
results. But in Christ's life here on earth there is nothing
past. It did not wait for the assistance of any subsequent results
in its own time, 1800 years ago; neither does it now. Historic
Christianity is sheer moonshine and un-Christian muddle-headedness.
For those true Christians who in every generation live a life
contemporaneous with that of Christ have nothing whatsoever to
do with Christians of the preceding generation, but all the
more with their contemporary, Christ. His life here on earth
attends every generation, and every generation severally, as
Sacred History; his life on earth is eternal contemporaneousness.
For this reason all learned lecturing about Christianity, which
has its haunt and hiding-place in the assumption that Christianity
is something which belongs to the past and to the 1800 years of
history, this lecturing is the most un-Christian of heresies,
as every one would readily recognize if he but tried to imagine
the generation contemporaneous with Christ as--lecturing! No,
we must ever keep in mind that every generation (of the faithful)
is contemporaneous with him.

If you cannot master yourself so as to make yourself contemporaneous
with him and thus become a Christian; or if he cannot, as your
contemporary, draw you to himself, then you will never be a
Christian. You may, if you please, honor, praise, thank, and
with all worldly goods reward, him who deludes you into thinking
that you are a Christian; nevertheless--he deceives you. You
may count yourself happy that you were not contemporaneous with
one who dared to assert this; or you may be exasperated to madness
by the torment, like that of the "gadfly,[26]" of being contemporaneous
with one who says this to your face: in the first case you are
deceived, whereas in the second you have at least had a chance
to hear the truth.

If you cannot bear this contemporaneousness, and not bear to see
this sight in reality--if you cannot prevail upon yourself to go
out into the street--and behold! it is God in that loathsome
procession; and if you cannot bear to think that this will be
your condition also if you kneel and worship him: then you are
not essentially a Christian. In that case, what you will have
to do is to admit the fact unconditionally to yourself, so that
you may, above all, preserve humility, and fear and trembling,
when contemplating what it means really to be a Christian. For
that way you must proceed, in order to learn and to practice
how to flee to grace, so that you will not seek it in vain; but
do not, for God's sake, go to any one to be "consoled." For to
be sure it is written: "blessed are the eyes which see the things
that ye see,[27]" which word the priests have on the tips of
their tongues--curiously enough; at times, perhaps, even to
defend a worldly finery which, if contemporary with Christ,
would be rather incongruous--as if these words had not been
said solely about those contemporaries of his who believed.
If his exaltation had been evident to the eyes so that every
one without any trouble could have beheld it, why then it would
be incorrect to say that Christ abased himself and assumed the
guise of a servant, and it would be superfluous to warn against
being offended in him; for why in the world should one take
offense in an exalted one arrayed in glory? And how in the world
will you explain it that Christ fared so ill and that everybody
failed to rush up admiringly to behold what was so plain? Ah no,
"he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him" (Isaiah 53, 2[28]);
and there was to all appearances nothing remarkable about him
who in lowly guise, and by performing signs and wonders, constantly
presented the possibility of offense, who claimed to be God--in
lowly guise; which therefore expresses: in the first place,
what God means by compassion, and by one's self needing to be
humble and poor if one wishes to be compassionate; and in the
second place, what God means by the misery of mankind. Which,
again, in both instances is extremely different from what men
mean by these things and which every generation, to the end
of time, has to learn over again from the beginning, and beginning
in every respect at the same point where those who were contemporary
with Christ had to start; that is, to practice these things
as contemporaries of Christ. Human impatience and unruliness
is, of course, of no avail whatsoever. No man will be able to
tell you in how far you may succeed in becoming essentially
a Christian. But neither will anxiety and fear and despair help
one. Sincerity toward God is the first and the last condition,
sincerity in confessing to one's self just where one stands,
sincerity before God in ever aiming at one's task. However slowly
one may proceed, and if it be but crawling--one is, at any rate,
in the right position and is not misled and deceived by the
trick of changing the nature of Christ who, instead of being
God, is thereby made to represent that sentimental compassion
which is man's own invention; by which men instead of being
lifted up to heaven by Christianity, are delayed on their way
and remain human and no more.




THE MORAL


"And what, then, does all this signify?" It signifies that every
one, in silent inwardness before God, is to feel humility before
what it means to be in the strictest sense a Christian; is to
confess sincerely before God what his position is, so that he
may worthily partake of the grace which is offered to every one
who is not perfect, that is, to every one. And it means no more
than that. For the rest let him attend to his work and find joy
in it, let him love his wife, rejoicing in her, let him raise his
children to be a joy to him, and let him love his fellow-men and
enjoy life. God will surely let him know if more is demanded of
him, and will also help him to accomplish it; for in the terrifying
language of the law this sounds so terrible because it would
seem as if man by his own strength were to hold fast to Christ,
whereas in the language of love it is Christ that holds fast
to him. As was said, then, God will surely let him know if more
is demanded of him. But what is demanded of every one is that he
humble himself in the presence of God under the demands of ideality.
And therefore these demands should be heard, and heard again and
again in all their absoluteness. To be a Christian has become
a matter of no importance whatever--a mummery, something one
is anyway, or something one acquires more readily than a trick.
In very truth, it is high time that the demands of ideality were
heard.

"But if being a Christian is something so terrifying and awesome,
how in all the world can a man get it into his head to wish to
accept Christianity?" Very simply and, if you so wish, quite
according to Luther: only the consciousness of sin, if I may
express myself so, can force one--from the other side, grace
exerts the attraction--can force one into this terror. And in
the same instant the Christian ideal is transformed, and is
sheer mildness, grace, love, and pity. Looking at it any other
way, however, Christianity is, and shall ever be, the greatest
absurdity, or else the greatest terror. Approach is had only
through the consciousness of sin, and to desire to enter by
any other way amounts to a crime of lèse-majesté against Christianity.

But sin, or the fact that you and I, individually, are sinners,
has at present either been done away with, or else the demands
have been lowered in an unjustifiable manner, both in life--the
domestic, the civic, as well as the ecclesiastic--and in science
which has invented the new doctrine of sin in general. As an
equivalent, one has hit upon the device of helping men into
Christianity, and keeping them in it, by the aid of a knowledge
of world-historic events, of that mild teaching, the exalted
and profound spirit of it, about Christ as a friend, etc., etc.--all
of which Luther would have called stuff and nonsense and which
is really blasphemy, aiming as it does at fraternizing impudently
with God and with Christ.

Only the consciousness of being a sinner can inspire one with
absolute respect for Christianity. And just because Christianity
demands absolute respect it must and shall, to any other way of
looking at it, seem absurdity or terror; just because only thereby
can the qualitative and absolute emphasis fall on the fact that
it is only the consciousness of being a sinner which will procure
entrance into it, and at the same time give the vision which,
being absolute respect, enables one to see the mildness and love
and compassion of Christianity.

The poor in spirit who acknowledge themselves to be sinners,
they do not need to know the least thing about the difficulties
which appear when one is neither simple nor humble-minded. But
when this humble consciousness of one's self, i. e., the individual's,
being a sinner is lacking--aye, even though one possessed all
human ingenuity and wisdom, and had all accomplishments possible
to man: it will profit him little. Christianity will in the same
degree rise terrifying before him and transform itself into
absurdity or terror; until he learns, either to renounce it,
or else, by the help of what is nothing less than scientific
propædeutics, apologetics, etc., that is, through the torments
of a contrite heart, to enter into Christianity by the narrow
path, through the consciousness of sin.


[Footnote 1: First Part; comprising about one-fourth of the whole book.]

[Footnote 2: I. e. Christ; _cf._ Introduction for the use of small
letters.]

[Footnote 3: Socrates.]

[Footnote 4: John I, 1.]

[Footnote 5: Matthew 20, 15.]

[Footnote 6: Luke 11, 14.]

[Footnote 7: Kierkegaard's note: by history we mean here profane history,
world history, history as such, as against Sacred History.]

[Footnote 8: _Cf._ the claim of the Pharisees, Matth. 23, 30: "If we
had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers
with them in the blood of the prophets."]

[Footnote 9: One is here irresistibly reminded of passages in Ibsen's
"Brand," e. g., Brand's conversation with Einar, in Act I. _Cf._ also
"The invitation and the inviter" and Introduction]

[Footnote 10: Matthew 11, 6.]

[Footnote 11: Luke 18, 32.]

[Footnote 12: Matthew 20, 27f.]

[Footnote 13: The original here does not agree with the sense of the
passage.]

[Footnote 14: Björnson's play of "Beyond Human Power," Part I, Act 2,
reads like an elaboration of these views.]

[Footnote 15: Matthew 9, 16.]

[Footnote 16: The following passage is capable of different
interpretations in the original.]

[Footnote 17: Matthew 14, 17.]

[Footnote 18: _Cf._ 1 Cor. 2, 9.]

[Footnote 19: John 3, 1f.]

[Footnote 20: Luke 23, 35.]

[Footnote 21: John 2, 4, etc.]

[Footnote 22: The passage is not quite clear. Probably, you will not be
the man to explain this phenomenon in the very opposite terms, viz., as
the divinity himself.]

[Footnote 23: Here, the unreserved identification with human suffering
above referred to.]

[Footnote 24: _Cf._ Footnote 8, in "The Misfortune of Christendom."]

[Footnote 25: As my friend, H. M. Jones, points out, the following passage
is essentially Aristotelian: "The true difference is that one (history)
relates what has happened, the other (poetry) what may happen";
"Poetics," Chap. IX.]

[Footnote 26: _Cf._ Plato's "Apologia" where Socrates is made to say of
himself that he is inflicted on the Athenians like a gadfly on a horse,
in order to keep them awake.]

[Footnote 27: Luke 10, 23.]

[Footnote 28: Kierkegaard's own note.]




THE PRESENT MOMENT[1]


BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION

(No. I, 1)


Plato says somewhere in his "Republic" that things will go well
only when those men shall govern the state who do not desire to
govern. The idea is probably that, assuming the necessary capability,
a man's reluctance to govern affords a good guarantee that he
will govern well and efficiently; whereas a man desirous of
governing may very easily either abuse his power and become
a tyrant, or by his desire to govern be brought into an unforeseen
situation of dependence on the people he is to rule, so that
his government really becomes an illusion.

This observation applies also to other relations where much
depends on taking things seriously: assuming there is ability
in a man, it is best that he show reluctance to meddle with
them. To be sure, as the proverb has it: "where there is a will
there is a way"; but true seriousness appears only when a man
fully equal to his task is forced, against his will, to undertake
it--against his will, but fully equal to the task.

In this sense I may say of myself that I bear a correct relation
to the task in hand: to work in the present moment; for God knows
that nothing is more distasteful to me.

Authorship--well, I confess that I find it pleasant; and I may
as well admit that I have dearly loved to write--in the manner,
to be sure, which suits me. And what I have loved to do is precisely
the opposite of working in the present moment. What I have loved
is precisely remoteness from the present moment--that remoteness
in which, like a lover, I may dwell on my thoughts and, like an
artist in love with his instrument, entertain myself with language
and lure from it the expressions demanded by my thoughts--ah
blissful entertainment! In an eternity I should not weary of
this occupation.

To contend with men--well, I do like it in a certain sense; for
I have by nature a temperament so polemic that I feel in my
element only when surrounded by men's mediocrity and meanness.
But only on one condition, viz., that I be permitted to scorn
them in silence and to satisfy the master passion of my soul:
scorn--opportunity for which my career as an author has often
enough given me.

I am therefore a man of whom it may be said truthfully that he
is not in the least desirous to work in the present moment--very
probably I have been called to do so for that very reason.

Now that I am to work in the present moment I must, alas! say
farewell to thee, beloved remoteness, where there was no necessity
to hurry, but always plenty of time, where I could wait for
hours and days and weeks for the proper expression to occur
to me; whereas now I must break with all such regards of tender
love.[2] And now that I am to work in the present moment I find
that there will be not a few persons whom I must oblige by paying
my respects to all the insignificant things which mediocrity
with great self-importance will lecture about; to all the nonsense
which mediocre people, by interpreting into my words their own
mediocrity, will find in all I shall write; and to all the lies
and calumnies to which a man is exposed against whom those two
great powers in society: envy and stupidity, must of necessity
conspire.

Why, then, do I wish to work in the present moment? Because I
should forever repent of not having done so, and forever repent
of having been discouraged by the consideration that the generation
now living would find a representation of the essential truths of
Christianity interesting and curious reading, at most; having
accomplished which they will calmly remain where they are; that
is, in the illusion that they are Christians and that the clergy's
toying with Christianity really is Christianity.




A PANEGYRIC ON THE HUMAN RACE OR PROOF THAT THE NEW TESTAMENT IS
NO LONGER TRUE.

(No. II, 5)


In the New Testament the Savior of the World, our Lord Jesus
Christ, represents the matter in this way: "Strait is the gate,
and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be
that find it.[3]"

--Now, however, just to confine ourselves to Denmark, the way
is as broad as a road can possibly be; in fact, the broadest in
Denmark, for it is the road we all travel. At the same time it
is in all respects a comfortable way, and the gate as wide as
it is possible for a gate to be; for certainly a gate cannot
be wider than to let all men pass through _en masse_:

Therefore, the New Testament is no longer true.

All credit is due to the human race! For thou, oh Savior of
the World, thou didst entertain too low an estimate of the human
race, so that thou didst not foresee the exalted plan which, in
its perfectibility, it may reach by steadily continued endeavor!

To such an extent, then, is the New Testament no longer true: the
way is the broadest possible, the gate the widest possible, and
we are all Christians. In fact, I may venture still further--I
am enthusiastic about it, for you see I am writing a panegyric
on the human race--I venture to assert that the average Jew
living among us is, to a certain degree, a Christian just as
well as we others: to such an extent are we all Christians,
and to such an extent is the New Testament no longer true.

And, since the point is to find out all which may be adduced
to extol the human race, one ought--while having a care not
to mention anything which is not true--one ought to watch that
nothing, nothing escape one which in this connection may serve
as a proof or even as a suggestion. So I venture still further--without
wishing to be too positive, as I lack definite information on this
subject and would like, therefore, to refer the matter to specialists
in this line to decide--: whether there are not present among
our domestic animals, or at any rate the nobler ones, such as
the horse, the dog and the cow, indications of a Christian
spirit. It is not improbable. Consider what it means to live
in a Christian state, among a Christian people, where everything
is Christian and everybody is a Christian and where one, turn
where one may, sees nothing but Christians and Christianity,
truth and martyrs for the truth--it is not at all unlikely that
this exerts an influence on the nobler domestic animals and
thereby again--which is ever of the utmost importance, according
to the opinion both of veterinarians and of clergymen--an influence
on their progeny. We have all read of Jacob's ruse, how in order
to obtain spotted lambs he put party-colored twigs into the
watering troughs, so that the ewes saw nothing but mottled things
and then brought forth spotted lambs. Hence it is not improbable--although
I do not wish to be positive, since I do not belong to the profession,
but would rather have this passed on by a committee composed of both
clergymen and veterinarians--I say, it is not improbable that
the result will finally be that the domestic animals living in
a Christian nation will produce a Christian progeny. The thought
almost takes away my breath. To be sure, in that case the New
Testament will to the greatest possible extent have ceased to be true.

Ah, Thou Savior of the World, when Thou saidst with great concern:
"When the Son of man cometh, shall He find Faith on the earth?[4]"--and
when Thou didst bow Thy head in death, then didst Thou least of
all think that Thy expectations were to be exceeded to such a
degree, and that the human race would in such a pretty and touching
way render the New Testament no longer true, and Thy significance
almost doubtful; for such nice creatures certainly also needed a
Savior![5]




IF WE ARE REALLY CHRISTIANS--THEN WHAT IS GOD?

(No. II, 8)


If it is not so--that all we mean by being "Christians" is a
delusion--that all this machinery, with a State Church and thousands
of spiritual-worldly councillors of chancery, etc., is a stupendous
delusion which will not be of the least help to us in the life
everlasting but, on the contrary, will be turned into an accusation
against us--if this is not so; for if it is, then let us, for the
sake of life everlasting, get rid of it, the sooner the better--

If it is not so, and if what we understand by being a Christian really
is to be a Christian: then what is God in Heaven?

He is the most ridiculous being that ever existed, His Word is
the most ridiculous book which has ever appeared; for to move
heaven and earth, as He does in his Word, and to threaten with
hell and everlasting damnation--in order to obtain as His result
what we understand by being Christians (and our assumption was
that we are true Christians)--well, now, has anything so ridiculous
ever been seen before? Imagine that a fellow with a loaded pistol
in his hand held up a person and said to him, "I shall shoot you";
or imagine, what is still more terrible, that he said, "I shall
seize you and torture you to death in the most horrible manner,
if"--now watch, here's the point--"if you do not render your
life here on earth as profitable and as enjoyable as you can":
would not that be utterly ridiculous? For to obtain that effect
it certainly is not necessary to threaten one with a loaded
pistol and the most painful torture; in fact, it is possible
that neither the loaded pistol nor the most painful torture
would be able to deter him from making his life as comfortable
as he can. And the same is true when, by fear of eternal punishment
(terrible threat!), and by hope of eternal salvation, He wishes
to bring about--well, to make us what we are (for what we call
Christian is, as we have seen, really being Christian), to make
us--well, to make us what we are; that is, make men live as
they please; for to abstain from committing crimes is nothing
but common prudence!

The most terrible blasphemy is the one of which "Christianity"
is guilty, which is, to transform the God of the Spirit into--a
ridiculous piece of nonsense. And the stupidest kind of worship,
more stupid than any idolatry ever was among the heathen, and
more stupid than to worship as a god some stone, or an ox, or
an insect--more stupid than anything, is to adore as god--a fool!




DIAGNOSIS

(No. IV, 1)


I


Every physician will admit that by the correct diagnosis of a
malady more than half the fight against it is won; also, that
if a correct diagnosis has not been made, all skill and all
care and attention will be of little avail.

The same is true with regard to religion.

We are agreed to let stand the claim that in "Christendom" we are
Christians, every one of us; and then we have laid and, perhaps,
will lay, emphasis now on this, now on that, side of the teachings
of the Scriptures.

But the truth is: we are not only not Christians--no, we are not
even the heathen to whom Christianity may be taught without
misgivings, and what is worse, we are prevented through a delusion,
an enormous delusion (viz. "Christendom," the Christian state,
a Christian country, a Christian world) from becoming Christians.

And then the suggestion is made to one to continue untouched and
unchanged this delusion and, rather, to furnish a new presentation
of the teachings of Christ.[6]

This has been suggested; and, in a certain sense, it is altogether
fitting. Just because one lives in a delusion (not to speak even
of being interested in keeping up the delusion), one is bound
to desire that which will feed the malady--a common enough observation
this--the sick man desiring precisely those things which feed his
malady.




II


Imagine a hospital. The patients are dying off like so many flies.
The methods are changed, now this way, now that: of no avail! What
may be the cause? The cause lies in the building--the whole
building is tainted. The patients are put down as having died,
the one of this, the other of that, disease, but strictly speaking
this is not true; for they all died from the taint which is in the
building.

The same is true in religion. That religious conditions are
wretched, and that people in respect of their religion are in
a wretched condition, nothing is more certain. So one ventures
the opinion that if we could but have a new hymn-book; and another,
if we could but have a new service-book; and a third, if we could
but have a musical service, etc., etc.--that then matters would
mend.

In vain; for the fault lies in the edifice. The whole ramshackle
pile of a State Church which has not been aired, spiritually
speaking, in times out of mind--the air in it has developed
a taint. And therefore religious life has become diseased or
has died out; alas, for precisely that which the worldly mind
regards as health is, in a Christian sense, disease--just as,
vice versa, that which is healthy in a Christian sense, is regarded
as diseased from a worldly point of view.

Then let the ramshackle pile collapse, get it out of the way,
close all these shops and booths which are the only ones which
are excepted from the strict Sunday regulations, forbid this
official double-dealing, put them out of commission, and provide
for them, for all these quacks:--even though it is true that
the royally attested physician is the acceptable one, and he
who is not so attested is a quack: in Christianity it is just
the reverse; that is, the royally attested teacher is the quack,
is a quack by the very fact that he is royally attested--and
let us worship God again in simplicity, instead of making a
fool of him in splendid edifices; let us be in earnest again
and stop playing; for a Christianity preached by royal officials
who are payed and insured by the state and who use the police
against the others, such a Christianity bears about the same
relation to the Christianity of the New Testament as swimming
with the help of a cork-belt or a bladder does to swimming alone--it
is mere play.

Yes, let that come about. What Christianity needs is not the
stifling protection of the state--ah no, it needs fresh air,
it needs persecution and--the protection of God. The state does
only mischief in averting persecution and surely is not the
medium through which God's protection can be conducted. Whatever
you do, save Christianity from the state, for with its protection
it overlies Christianity like a fat woman overlying her child
with her carcass, beside teaching Christianity the most abominable
bad habits--as, e.g., to use the police force and to call that
Christianity.




III


A person is growing thinner every day and is wasting away. What
may the trouble be? For surely he is not suffering want! "No,
sure enough," says the doctor, "that is not the trouble. The
trouble is precisely with his eating, with his eating in season
and out of season, with his eating without being hungry, with
his using stimulants to produce an appetite, and in this manner
ruining his digestion, so that he is wasting away as if he suffered
want."

The same is true in religion. The worst of all is to satisfy
a craving which has not as yet made its appearance, to anticipate
it, or--worse still--by the help of stimulants to produce something
which looks like a craving, which then is promptly satisfied. Ah,
the shame of it! And yet this is exactly what is being done in
religion where people are in very truth fooled out of the real
meaning of life and helped to waste their lives. That is in
very truth, the effect of this whole machinery of a state church
and a thousand royal officials who, under the pretense of being
spiritual guides for the people, trick them out of the highest
thing in life, which is, the solicitude about one's self, and
the need which would surely of itself find a teacher or minister
after its own mind; whereas now the need--and it is just the
growth of this sense, of a need which gives life its highest
significance--whereas now this need does not arise at all, but
on the contrary is forestalled by being satisfied long before
it can arise. And this is the way, they claim, this is the way
to continue the work which the Savior of Mankind did begin--stunting
the human race as they do. And why is this so? Because there
happen to be a thousand and one royal officials who have to
support their families by furnishing what is called--spiritual
guidance for men's souls!




THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT; THE CHRISITANITY OF "CHRISTENDOM"

(No. V, 4)


The intention of Christianity was: to change everything.

The result, the Christianity of "Christendom" is: everything,
literally everything, remained as it had been, with just the
difference that to everything was affixed the attribute "Christian"--and
for the rest (strike up, fiddlers!) we live in Heathendom--so
merrily, so merrily the dance goes around; or, rather, we live
in a Heathendom made more refined by the help of Life Everlasting
and by help of the thought that, after all, it is all Christian!

Try it, point to what you will, and you shall see that I am right
in my assertion.

If what Christianity demanded was chastity, then away with brothels!
But the change is that the brothels have remained just as they
did in Heathendom, and the proportion of prostitutes remained
the same, too; to be sure, they became "Christian" brothels! A
brothel-keeper is a "Christian" brothel-keeper, he is a Christian
as well as we others. Exclude him from church membership? "Why,
for goodness sake," the clergyman will say, "what would things
come to if we excluded a single paying member?" The brothel-keeper
dies and gets a funeral oration with a panegyric in proportion
to the amount he pays. And after having earned his money in a
manner which, from a Christian point of view, is as filthy and
base as can be (for, from a Christian point of view it would be
more honorable if he had stolen it) the clergyman returns home.
He is in a hurry, for he is to go to church in order to deliver
an oration or, as Bishop Martensen would say, "bear witness."

But if Christianity demanded honesty and uprightness, and doing
away with this swindle, the change which really came about was
this: the swindling has remained just as in Heathendom, "every
one (every Christian) is a thief in his own line"; only, the
swindling has taken, on the predicate "Christian." So we now
have "Christian" swindling--and the "clergyman" bestows his
blessing on this Christian community, this Christian state,
in which one cheats just as one did in Heathendom, at the same
time that one pays the "clergyman," that is, the biggest swindler
of them all, and thus cheats one's self into Christianity.

And if Christianity demanded seriousness in life and doing away
with the praise and approbation of vanity--why, everything has
remained as before, with just this difference that it has assumed
the predicate "Christian." Thus the trumpery business with decorations,
titles, and rank, etc. has become Christian--and the clergyman
(that most indecent of all indecencies, that most ridiculous of
all ridiculous hodgepodges), he is as pleased as Punch to be decorated
himself--with the "cross." The cross? Why, certainly; for in the
Christianity of "Christendom" has not the cross become something
like a child's hobby-horse and tin-trumpet?

And so with everything. There is implanted in man no stronger
instinct, after that of self-preservation, than the instinct of
reproduction; for which reason Christianity seeks to reduce its
strength, teaching that it is better not to marry; "but if they
cannot contain, let them marry; for it is better to marry than
to burn." But in Christendom the propagation of the race has
become the serious business of life and of Christianity; and
the clergyman--that quint-essence of nonsense done up in long
clothes--the clergyman, the teacher of Christianity, of the
Christianity of the New Testament, has his income adjusted to
the fact that the human race is active in propagating the race,
and gets a little something for each child!

As I said, look about you and you will find that everything
is as I told you: the change from Heathendom consists in everything
remaining unchanged but having assumed the predicate "Christian."




MODERN RELIGIOUS GUARANTEES

(No. V, 8)


In times long, long past people looked at matters in this fashion:
it was demanded of him who would be a teacher of Christianity
that his life should be a guarantee for the teachings he proclaimed.

This idea was abandoned long ago, the world having become wiser
and more serious. It has learned to set little store by these
illiberal and sickly notions of personal responsibility, having
learned to look for purely objective ends. The demand is made
now of the teacher that his life should guarantee that what he
has to say is entertaining and dramatic stuff, amusing, and
purely objective.

Some examples. Suppose you wanted to speak about Christianity,
that is, the Christianity of the New Testament which expresses
preference for the single state--and suppose you yourself are
unmarried: why, my dear man! you ought not to speak on this
subject, because your congregation might think that you meant
what you said and become disquieted, or it might feel insulted
that you thus, very improperly, mixed in your own affairs. No,
dear sir, it will take a little longer before you are entitled
to speak seriously on this matter so as really to satisfy the
congregation. Wait till you have buried your first wife and
are well along with your second wife: then it will be time for
you to stand before your congregation to preach and "bear witness"
that Christianity prefers the single state--then you will satisfy
them altogether; for your life will furnish the guarantee that
it is all tomfoolery and great fun, or that what you say is--interesting.
Indeed, how interesting! For just as, to make it interesting,
the husband must be unfaithful to his wife and the wife to her
husband, likewise truth becomes interesting, intensely interesting,
only when one lets one's self be carried away by one's feelings,
be fascinated by them--but of course does the precise opposite
and thus in an underhand manner is re-assured in persisting in
one's ways.

Do you wish to speak about Christianity's teaching contempt
for titles and decorations and all the follies of fame--and
should you happen to be neither a person of rank nor anything
of the kind: Why, my dear sir! You ought not to undertake to
speak on this subject. Why, your congregation might think you
were in earnest, or feel insulted by such a lack of tact in
forcing your personality on their notice. No, indeed, you ought
to wait till you have a lot of decorations, the more the merrier;
you ought to wait till you drag along with a rigmarole of titles,
so many that you hardly know yourself what you are called: then
is your time come to stand before your congregation to preach
and "bear witness"--and you will undoubtedly satisfy them; for
your life will then furnish the guarantee that it is but a dramatic
divertissement, an interesting forenoon entertainment.

Is it your intention to preach Christianity in poverty, and
insist that only thus it is taught in truth--and you happen
to be very literally a poor devil: Why, my dear sir! You ought
not to venture to speak on this subject. Why, your congregation
might think you were in earnest, they might become afraid and
lose their good humor, and they might be very unpleasantly affected
by thus having poverty-thrust in on them. No indeed, first get
yourself some fat living, and when you have had it so long that
your promotion to one still fatter is to be expected: then is
your time come to stand before your congregation and to preach
and "bear witness"--and you will satisfy them; for your life
then furnishes the guarantee that it is just a joke, such as
serious men like to indulge in, now and then, in theatre or
in church, as a sort of recreation to gather new strength--for
making money.

And that is the way they honor God in the churches! And then
these silk and velvet orators weep, they sob, their voice is
drowned in tears! Ah, if it be true (and it is, since God Himself
has said so), if it be true that He counts the tears of the
afflicted and puts them into His bottle,[7] then woe to these
orators, if God has counted also their Sunday tears and put
them into His bottle! And woe to us all if God really heeds
these Sunday tears--especially those of the speakers, but also
those of the listeners! For a Sunday preacher would indeed be
right if he said--and, oratorically, this would have a splendid
effect, especially if accompanied by his own tears and suppressed
sobs--he would be right if he said to his audience: I shall
count all the futile tears you have shed in church, and with
them I shall step accusingly before you on the Day of Judgment--indeed,
he is right; only please not to forget that, after all, the
speaker's own dramatic tears are by far more dreadful than the
thoughtless tears of his listeners.




WHAT SAYS THE FIRE-MARSHAL

(No. VI, 5)


That a man who in some fashion or other has what one calls a
"cause," something he seriously purposes to accomplish--and
there are other persons who make it their business to counteract,
and antagonize, and hurt him--that he must take measures against
these his enemies, this will be evident to every one. But that
there is a well-intentioned kindness by far more dangerous,
perhaps, and one that seems calculated to prevent the serious
accomplishment of his mission, this will not at once be clear
to every one.

When a person suddenly falls ill, kindly-intentioned folk will
straightway rush to his help, and one will suggest this, another
that--and if all those about him had a chance to have their way
it would certainly result in the sick man's death; seeing that
even one person's well-meaning advice may be dangerous enough.
And even if nothing is done, and the advice of neither the assembled
and well-meaning crowd nor of any one person is taken, yet their
busy and flurried presence may be harmful, nevertheless, inasmuch
as they are in the way of the physician.

Likewise at a fire. Scarcely has the alarm of fire been sounded
but a great crowd of people will rush to the spot, good and kindly
and sympathetic, helpful people, the one with a bucket, the other
with a basin, still another with a hand-squirt--all of them goodly,
kindly, sympathetic, helpful persons who want to do all they can
to extinguish the fire.

But what says the fire-marshal? The fire-marshal, he says--well,
at other times the fire-marshal is a very pleasant and refined
man; but at a fire he does use coarse language--he says or,
rather, he roars out: "Oh, go to hell with your buckets and
hand-squirts!" And then, when these well-meaning people feel
insulted, perhaps, and think it highly improper to be treated
in this fashion, and would like at least to be treated respectfully--what
says the fire-marshal then? Well, at other times the fire-marshal
is a very pleasant and refined gentleman who will show every
one the respect due him; but at a fire he is somewhat different--he
says: "Where the devil is the police?" And when the policemen
arrive he says to them: "Rid me of these damn people with their
buckets and hand-squirts; and if they won't clear out, then club
them on their heads, so that we get rid of them and--can get at
the fire!"

That is to say, in the case of a fire the whole way of looking
at things is a very different one from that of quiet every-day
life. The qualities which in quiet every-day life render one
well-liked, viz., good-nature and kindly well-meaning, all this
is repaid, in the case of a fire, with abusive language and
finally with a crack on the head.

And this is just as it should be. For a conflagration is a serious
business; and wherever we have to deal with a serious business
this well-intentioned kindness won't do at all. Indeed, any
serious business enforces a very different mode of behavior
which is: either-or. Either you are able really to do something,
and really have something to do here; or else, if that be not
the case, then the serious business demands precisely that you
take yourself away. And if you will not comprehend that, the
fire-marshal proposes to have the police hammer it into your
head; which may do you a great deal of good, as it may help
to render you a little serious, as is befitting so serious a
business as a fire.

But what is true in the case of a fire holds true also in matters
of the spirit. Wherever a cause is to be promoted, or an enterprise
to be seen through, or an idea to be served--you may be sure that
when he who really is the man to do it, the right man, he who,
in a higher sense has and ought to have command, he who is in
earnest and can make the matter the serious business it really
is--you may be sure that when he arrives at the spot, so to say,
he will find there a nice company of easy-going, addle-pated
twaddlers who pretending to be engaged in serious business,
dabble in wishing to serve this cause, to further that enterprise,
to promote that idea--a company of addle-pated fools who will
of course consider one's unwillingness to make common cause
with them (which unwillingness precisely proves one's seriousness)--will
of course consider that a sure proof of the man's lack of seriousness.
I say, when the right man arrives he will find this; but I might
also look at it in this fashion: the very question as to whether
he is the right man is most properly decided by his attitude to
that crowd of fools. If he thinks they may help him, and that
he will add to his strength by joining them, then he is _eo ipso_
not the right man. The right man will understand at once, as
did the fire-marshal, that the crowd must be got out of the way;
in fact, that their presence and puttering around is the most
dangerous ally the fire could have. Only, that in matters of
the spirit it is not as in the case of the conflagration, where
the fire-marshal needs but to say to the police: rid me of these
people!

Thus in matters of the spirit, and likewise in matters of religion.
History has frequently been compared to what the chemists call
a "process." The figure is quite suggestive, providing it is
correctly understood. For instance, in the "process of filtration"
water is run through a filter and by this process loses its
impurities. In a totally different sense history is a process.
The idea is given utterance--and then enters into the process
of history. But unfortunately this process (how ridiculous a
supposition!) consists not in purifying the idea, which never
is purer than at its inception; oh no, it consists in gradually
and increasingly botching, bungling, and making a mess of, the
idea, in using up the idea, in--indeed, is not this the opposite
of filtering?--adding the impurer elements which it originally
lacked: until at last, by the enthusiastic and mutually appreciative
efforts of successive generations, the idea has absolutely disappeared
and the very opposite of the original idea is now called the
idea, which is then asserted to have arisen through a historic
process by which the idea is purified and elevated.

When finally the right man arrives, he who in the highest sense
is called to the task--for all we know, chosen early and slowly
educated for this business--which is, to throw light on the matter,
to set fire to this jungle which is a refuge for all kinds of
foolish talk and delusions and rascally tricks--when he comes
he will always find a nice company of addle-pated fools and
twaddlers who, surely enough, do think that, perhaps, things
are wrong and that "something must be done about it"; or who
have taken the position, and talk a good deal about it, that
it is preposterous to be self-important and talk about it. Now
if he, the right man, is deceived but a single instant and thinks
that it is this company who are to aid him, then it is clear
he is not the right man. If he is deceived and has dealings
with that company, then providence will at once take its hand
off him, as not fit. But the right man will see at a glance,
as the fire-marshal does, that the crowd who in the kindness
of their hearts mean to help in extinguishing a conflagration
by buckets and hand-squirts--the right man will see that the
same crowd who here, when there is a question, not of extinguishing
a fire, but rather of setting something on fire, will in the
kindness of their hearts wish to help, with a sulphur match
sans fire or a wet spill--he will see that this crowd must be
got rid of, that he must not have the least thing in common
with this crowd, that he will be! obliged to use the coarsest
possible language against them--he who perhaps at other times
is anything but coarse. But the thing of supreme importance
is to be rid of the crowd; for the effect of the crowd is to
hamstring the whole cause by robbing it of its seriousness while
heartfelt sympathy is pretended. Of course the crowd will then
rage against him, against his incredible arrogance and so forth.
This ought not to count with him, whether for or against. In
all truly serious business the law of: either--or, prevails.
Either, I am the man whose serious business this is, I am called
to it, and am willing to take a decisive risk; or, if this be
not the case, then the seriousness of the business demands that
I do not meddle with it at all. Nothing is more detestable and
mean, and nothing discloses and effects a deeper demoralization,
than this lackadaisical wishing to enter "somewhat" into matters
which demand an _aut--aut, aut Cæsar aut nihil_,[8] this taking
just a little part in something, to be so wretchedly lukewarm,
to twaddle about the business, and then by twaddling to usurp
through a lie the attitude of being better than they who wish
not to have anything whatever to do with the whole business--to
usurp through a lie the attitude of being better, and thus to
render doubly difficult the task of him whose business it really
is.




CONFIRMATION AND WEDDING CEREMONY; CHRISTIAN--COMEDY--OR WORSE STILL

(No. VII, 6)


Pricks of conscience (insofar as they may be assumed in this
connection)--pricks of conscience seem to have convinced "Christendom"
that it was, after all, going too far, and that it would not do--this
beastly farce of becoming a Christian by the simple method of
letting a royal official give the infant a sprinkle of water over
his head, which is the occasion for a family gathering with a
banquet to celebrate the day.

This won't do, was the opinion of "Christendom," for the opportunity
ought to be given the baptized individual to indorse personally his
baptismal vows.

For this purpose the rite of confirmation was devised--a splendid
invention, providing we take two things for granted: in the first
place, that the idea of divine worship is to make God ridiculous;
and in the second place, that its purpose is to give occasion
for family celebrations, parties, a jolly evening, a banquet which
is different from other banquets in that it--ah, exquisite--in
that it, "at the same time" has a religious significance.

"The tender child," thus Christendom, "can of course not assume
the baptismal vow personally, for this requires a real personality."
Consequently there was chosen--is this a stroke of genius or
just ingenious?--there was chosen the age of 14 or 15 year's,
the schoolboy age. This real personality--that is all right,
if you please--he is equal to the task of personally assuming
responsibility for the baptismal vow taken in behalf of the infant.

A boy of fifteen! Now, if it were a matter of 10 dollars, his
father would probably say: "No, my boy, I can't let you have
all that money, you are still too green for that." But for a
matter touching his eternal salvation where the point is to
assume, with all the seriousness one's personality is capable
of, and as a personality, responsibility for what certainly
could not in any profounder sense be called serious--when a
child is bound by a vow: for that the age of fifteen is excellently
fitting.

Excellently fitting. Oh yes if, as was remarked above, divine
worship serves a double purpose, viz., to render God ridiculous
in a very adroit manner--if you may call it so--and to furnish
the occasion for graceful family celebrations. In that case it
is indeed excellently fitting, as everything is on that occasion;
as is, likewise, the customary biblical lesson for the day which,
you will remember, begins: "Then the same day at evening, when
the doors were shut[9]"--and this text is particularly suitable
to a Confirmation Sunday. One is truly edified when hearing a
clergyman read it on a Confirmation Sunday.

As is easily perceived, then, the confirmation ceremony is still
worse nonsense than the baptism of infants, just because confirmation
pretends to supply what was lacking at the baptism, viz., a real
personality capable of making a vow in a matter touching one's
eternal salvation. In another sense this nonsense is, to be
sure, ingenious enough, as serving the self-interest of the
clergy who understand full well that if the decision concerning
a man's religion were reserved until he had reached maturity
(which were the only Christian, as well as the only sensible,
way), many might possess character enough to refuse to become
Christians by an act of hypocrisy. For this reason "the clergyman"
seeks to gain control of men in their infancy and their youth,
so that they would find it difficult, upon reaching a more mature
age, to break a "sacred" vow dating, to be sure, from one's
boyhood, but which would, perhaps, still be a serious enough
matter to many a one. Hence the clergy take hold of the infants,
the youths, and receive sacred promises and the like from them.
And what that man of God, "the clergyman," does, why, that is,
of course, a God-fearing action. Else, analogy might, perhaps,
demand that to the ordinance forbidding the sale of spirituous
liquors to minors there should be added one forbidding the taking
of solemn vows concerning one's eternal salvation from--boys;
which ordinance would look toward preventing the clergy, who
themselves are perjurers, from working--in order to salve their
own consciences--from working toward the greatest conceivable
shipwreck which is, to make all society become perjured; for
letting boys of fifteen bind themselves in a matter touching
their eternal salvation is a measure which is precisely calculated
to have that effect.

The ceremony of confirmation is, then, in itself a worse piece
of nonsense than the baptism of infants. But in order to miss
nothing which might, in any conceivable manner, contribute to
render confirmation the exact opposite of what it purports to
be, this ceremony has been connected with all manner of worldly
and civil affairs, so that the significance of confirmation lies
chiefly in the--certificate of character which the minister
makes out; without which certificate no boy or girl will be
able to get on at all in life.[10]

The whole thing is a comedy; and perhaps something might be
done to add greater dramatic illusion to the solemnity; as e.g.,
passing an ordinance forbidding any one to be confirmed in a
jacket, as not becoming a real personality; likewise, a regulation
ordering male candidates for confirmation to wear a beard during
the ceremony, which beard might, of course, be taken off for the
family celebration in the evening, or be used in fun and merrymaking.

I am not now attacking the community--they are led astray; they
cannot be blamed for liking this kind of divine worship, seeing
that they are left to their own devices and deceived by their
clergyman who has sworn an oath on the New Testament. But woe
to these clergymen, woe to them, these sworn liars! I know there
have been mockers at religion, and I know how much they would
have given to be able to do what I do; but they were not able
to, because God was not with them. It is different with me.
Originally as well disposed to the clergy as few have been,
and very ready to help them. I have undergone a change of heart
in the opposite direction, owing to their attitude. And the
Almighty is with me, and He knows how the whip is to be handled
so that the blows take effect, and that laughter must be that
whip, handled with fear and trembling--therefore am I used.




THE WEDDING CEREMONY


True worship of God consists, very simply, in doing God's will.

But that kind of divine service has never suited man's wishes.
That which occupies man's mind at all times, that which gives
rise to science[11] and makes science spread into many, many
sciences, and into interminable detail; that of which, and for
which, thousands of clergymen and professors live, that which
forms the contents of the history of Christendom, by the study
of which the clergyman or the professor is to be trained--is
to get a different kind of worship arranged, the main point of
which would be: to do what one pleases, but in such fashion that
the name of God and the invocation of God be brought into connection
therewith; by which arrangement man imagines himself safeguarded
against ungodliness--whereas, alas! just this procedure is the
most unqualified ungodliness.

For example: a man has the intention to make his living by killing
people. To be sure, he knows from the Word of God that this is
not permissible, that God's will is: thou shalt not kill! "All
right," thinks he, "but this way of serving God will not serve
my purposes--at the same time I don't care to be among the ungodly
ones, either." So what does he do but get hold of some priest who
in God's name blesses his dagger. Ah, _c'est bien autre chose!_

In the Scriptures the single state is recommended. "But," says
man, "that kind of worship really does not serve my purposes--and
surely, you can't say that I am an ungodly person; and such an
important step as marriage (which _nota bene_ God counsels against,
His opinion being, in fact, that the important thing is not to
take "this important step")--should I take such an important step
without making sure of God's blessing?" Bravo! "That is what we
have the priest for, that man of God, he will bestow the blessing
on this important step (_nota bene_ concerning which the most
important thing was not to take it at all) and so it will be
acceptable to God"--and so I have my own way; and my own way
becomes the way of worshipping God; and the priest has his own
way and gets his ten dollars, which are not earned in such a
simple way as, for example, by brushing people's clothes, or
by serving out beer and brandy--oh no! Was he not active on
behalf of God? To earn ten dollars in this fashion is: serving
God. Bravissimo!

What depth of nonsense and abomination! If something is not
pleasing to God, does it perhaps become pleasing to Him by having--why,
that is aggravating the mischief!--by having a clergyman along
who--why, that is aggravating the mischief still more!--who gets
ten dollars for declaring it pleasant to God?

Let us consider the marriage ceremony still further! In His
word God recommends the single state. Now suppose two young
people want to be married. To be sure, they ought certainly
to know, themselves, what Christianity is, seeing that they
call themselves Christians; but never mind that now. The lovers
then apply to--the clergyman; and the clergyman is, we remember,
pledged by his oath on the New Testament (which _nota bene_
recommends the single state). Now, if he is not a liar and a
perjurer who makes his money in the very shabbiest fashion,
he would be bound to take the following course: at most he could,
with human compassion for this human condition of being in love,
say to them: "Dear children, I am the one to whom you should
turn last of all; to turn to me on this occasion is, indeed,
as strange as if one should turn to the chief of police and
ask him how best to steal. My duty is to employ all means to
restrain you. At most, I can say, with the words of the Apostle
(for they are not the words of Our Lord), I can say to you:
well, if it must be, and you cannot contain, why, then find
some way of getting together; for fit is better to marry than
to burn.'[12] I know very well that you will be likely to shudder
when I speak in this manner about what you think is the most
beautiful thing in life; but I must do my duty. And it is therefore
I said to you that to me you should have applied last of all."

It is different in "Christendom." The priest--oh dear me!--if
there are but two to clap together, why certainly! Indeed, if
the persons concerned turned to a midwife they would perhaps
not be as sure to be confirmed in their conviction that their
intention is pleasing to God.

And so they are married; i.e. man has his own way, and this
having his own way strategically serves at the same time as
divine worship, God's name being connected with it. They are
married--by the priest! Ah, for having the clergyman along is
just what reassures one--the man who, to be sure, is pledged
by his oath to preach the New Testament, but who for a consideration
of ten dollars is the pleasantest company one could desire--that
man he guarantees that this act is true worship of God.

In a Christian sense one ought to say: precisely the fact that
a priest is in it, precisely that is the worst thing about the
whole business. If you want to be married you ought, rather,
be married by a smith; for then--if it were admissible to speak
in this fashion--then it might possibly escape God's attention;
whereas, if there is a priest along it can certainly not escape
His attention. Precisely the fact of the clergyman's being there
makes it as criminal an affair as possible--call to mind what
was said to a man who in a storm at sea invoked the gods: "By
all means do not let the gods notice that you are aboard!" Thus
one might say here also: By all means try to avoid calling in
a priest. The others, the smith and the lovers, have not pledged
themselves by an oath on the New Testament, so matters are not
as bad--if it be admissible to speak in this fashion--as when
the priest assists with his--holy presence.




AN ETERNITY TO REPENT IN!

(No. VIII, 3)


Let me relate a story. I did not read it in a book of devotion
but in what is generally called light reading. Yet I do not
hesitate to make use of it, and indicate its source only lest
any one be disturbed if he should happen to be acquainted with
it, or find out at some later time where it is from--lest he be
disturbed that I had been silent about this.

Once upon a time there lived somewhere in the East a poor old
couple. Utterly poor they were, and anxiety about the future
naturally grew when they thought of old age approaching. They
did not, indeed, constantly assail heaven with their prayers,
they were too God-fearing to do that; but still they were ever
praying to God for help.

Then one morning it happened that the old woman found an exceeding
large jewel on the hearth-stone, which she forthwith showed to
her husband, who recognized its value and easily perceived that
now their poverty was at an end.

What a bright future for these old people, and what gladness!
But frugal and pious as they were they decided not to sell the
jewel just yet, since they had enough wherewithal to live still
one more day. But on the morrow they would sell it, and then a
new life was to begin for them.

In the following night the woman dreamed that she was transported
to Paradise. An angel showed her about the splendors which only
an Oriental imagination can devise. He showed her a hall in which
there stood long rows of arm-chairs gemmed all over with precious
stones and pearls. These, so the angel explained, were the seats
of the pious. And last of all he pointed out to her the one
destined for herself. When regarding it more closely she discovered
that a very large jewel was lacking in the back of the chair, and
she asked the angel how that might be. He--ah, watch now, for
here is the point! The angel answered: "That was the jewel which
you found on your hearth-stone. It was given you ahead of time,
and it cannot be put in again."

In the morning the woman told her husband this dream. And she
was of the opinion that it was better, perhaps, to endure in
poverty the few years still left to them to live, rather than
to be without that jewel in all eternity. And her pious husband
was of the same opinion.

So in the evening they laid the jewel on the hearth-stone and
prayed to God to take it away again. And next morning it had
disappeared, for certain; and what had become of it the old
folks well knew: it was in its right place again.

This man was in truth happily married, and his wife a sensible
woman. But even if it were true, as is maintained so often,
that it is men's wives who cause them to lose sight of eternal
values: even if all men remained unmarried, there would still
be in every one of us an impulse, more ingenious and more pressing
and more unremitting than a woman, which will cause him to use
a wrong measure and to think a couple of years, or ten years,
or forty years, so enormous a length of time that even eternity
were quite brief in comparison; instead of these years being
as nothing when compared with the infinite duration of eternity.

Therefore, heed this well! You may by worldly wisdom escape
perhaps what it has pleased God to unite with the condition of
one's being a Christian, that is, sufferings and tribulations;
you may, and to your own destruction, by cleverly avoiding the
difficulties, perhaps, gain what God has forever made incompatible
with being a Christian, that is, the enjoyment of pleasures
and all earthly goods; you may, fooled by your own worldly wisdom,
perhaps, finally perish altogether, in the illusion that you
are on the right way because you have gained happiness in this
world: and then--you will have an eternity to repent in! An
eternity to repent in; to repent that you did not employ your
time in doing what might be remembered in all eternity; that is,
in truth to love God, with the consequence that you suffer the
persecution of men in this life.

Therefore, do not deceive yourself, and of all deceivers fear
most yourself! Even if it were possible for one, with regard
to eternity, to take something ahead of time, you would still
deceive yourself just by having something ahead of time--and
then an eternity to repent in!




A DOSE OF DISGUST WITH LIFE

(No. IX, 3)


Just as man--as is natural--desires that which tends to nourish
and revive his love of life, likewise he who wishes to live with
eternity in mind needs a constant dose of disgust with life
lest he become foolishly enamored of this world and, still more,
in order that he may learn thoroughly to be disgusted and bored
and sickened with the folly and lies of this wretched world. Here
is a dose of it:

God Incarnate is betrayed, mocked, deserted by absolutely all
men; not a single one, literally not a single one, remains faithful
to him--and then, afterwards, afterwards,--oh yes, afterwards,
there were millions of men who on their knees made pilgrimage
to the places where many hundred years ago His feet, perhaps,
trod the ground; afterwards, afterwards--oh yes, afterwards,
millions worshipped a splinter of the cross on which He was crucified!

And so it was always when men were contemporary with the great;
but afterwards, afterwards--oh yes, afterwards!

Must one then not loathe being human?

And again, must one not loathe being human? For these millions
who on their knees made pilgrimage to His grave, this throng of
people which no power on earth was able to overcome: but one
thing were necessary, Christ's return--and all these millions
would quickly regain their feet to run their way, so that the
whole throng were as if blown away; or would, in a mass, and
erect enough, rush upon Christ in order to kill him.

That which Christ and the Apostles and every martyr desires,
and desires as the only thing: that we should follow in His
footsteps, just that is the thing which mankind does not like
or does not find pleasure in.

No, take away the danger--so that it is but play, and then the
battallions of the human race will (ah, disgusting!) will perform
astonishing feats in aping Him; and then instead of an imitation
of Christ we get (ah, disgusting!), we get that sacred buffoonery--under
guidance and command (ah, disgusting!) of sworn clergymen who do
service as sergeants, lieutenants, etc.--ordained men who therefore
have the Holy Spirit's special assistance in this serious business.

[Footnote 1: Selections.]

[Footnote 2: The following sentence is not clear in the original.]

[Footnote 3: Matthew 7, 14.]

[Footnote 4: Luke 18, 8.]

[Footnote 5: The last line of this piece of bloody irony is not clear
in the original (S. V. XIII, 128). It will make better sense if one
substitutes "da" for the first "de."]

[Footnote 6: This suggestion had actually been made to Kierkegaard in the
course of his attacks on Martensen.]

[Footnote 7: Allusion to Psalm 56, 9; also, to a passage in one of Bishop
Mynster's sermons (S. V.).]

[Footnote 8: Either-or; either Cæsar or nothing (Cesare Borgia's slogan).]

[Footnote 9: "John 20, 19--where the disciples were assembled for
fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto
them. Peace be unto you."]

[Footnote 10: This was, until very recently, the universal rule in
Protestant Scandinavia and Germany.]

[Footnote 11: It is to be borne in mind that Danish _videnskab_, like
German _Wissenschaft_, embraces the humanities and theology as well.]

[Footnote 12: I Cor. 7, 9.]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF KIERKEGAARD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



It may at times have occurred to you, dear reader, to doubt 
somewhat the accuracy of that familiar philosophical thesis 
that the outer is the inner and the inner is the outer.? Perhaps 
you yourself have concealed a secret that in its joy or in its pain 
you felt was too intimate to share with others. Perhaps your 
life has put you in touch with people about whom you sus- 
pected that something of this nature was the case, although 
neither by force nor by inveiglement were you able to bring 
out into the open that which was hidden. Perhaps neither case 
applies to you and your life, and yet you are not unacquainted 
with that doubt; like a fleeting shape, it has drifted through 
your mind now and then. A doubt such as this comes and 
goes, and no one knows whence it comes or whither it goes.? 
I myself have always been rather heretically minded on this 
philosophical point and therefore early in my life developed 
the habit of making observations and investigations as well as 
possible. For guidance, I have consulted the authors whose 
view I shared in this respect—in brief, I have done all I could 
to make up for what has been left undone in the philosophical 
writings. Gradually, then, hearing became my most cherished 
sense, for just as the voice is the disclosure of inwardness in- 
commensurable with the exterior, so the ear is the instrument 
that apprehends this inwardness, hearing the sense by which it 
is appropriated. Consequently, every time I found a contradic- 
tion between what I saw and what I heard, my doubt was con- 
firmed and my zeal for observation increased. A priest who 
hears confessions is separated by a grillwork from the person 
making confession; he does not see him, he only hears. As he 
listens, he gradually forms a picture of the other’s outward ap- 
pearance corresponding to what he hears; thus he finds no con- 
tradiction. It is different, however, when one sees and hears si- 
multaneously but sees a grillwork between oneself and the 
speaker. My efforts to make observations along this line have 


4 Either/Or, I 


been quite varied as far as results are concerned. At times I 
have had luck, at times not, and to obtain any returns along 
these paths, one needs luck. But I have never lost the desire to 
continue my investigations. If at times I have been about to re- 
gret my persistence, so also at times my efforts have been 
crowned with unexpected good fortune. It was just such un- 
expected good fortune that in a most curious manner put me 
in possession of the papers I hereby have the honor to present 
to the reading public. In these papers, I had an opportunity to 
take a look at the lives of two men, which confirmed my sus- 
picion that the outer is not the inner. This was especially true 
of one of them. His exterior has been a complete contradiction 
of his interior. To a certain extent, it is also true of the other, 
inasmuch as he has hidden a more significant interior under a 
rather insignificant exterior. 


For the sake of order, it is probably best to tell first how I 
happened to come into possession of these papers. It is now 
about seven years since I spotted in a secondhand shop here in 
the city a writing desk that immediately attracted my atten- 
tion. It was not a modern piece of work, had been used consid- 
erably, and yet it captivated me. It is impossible for me to ex- 
plain the basis of this impression, but most people presumably 
have had a similar experience during their lives. My daily 
route took me past this secondhand dealer and his writing 
desk, and I never let a day go by without fixing my eyes on it 
in passing. Gradually that desk assumed a history for me; to 
see it became a necessity to me, and when on a rare occasion it 
was necessary to make a detour for its sake, I did not hesitate. 
With time, as I looked at it, the desire awakened in me to own 
it. To be sure, I felt that it was a strange desire, since I had no 
use for this piece of furniture, and it would be a prodigality for 
me to purchase it. But desire, as is known, is very sophistical. 
I found a pretext for going into the secondhand shop, inquired 
about other things, and as I was about to leave I casually made 
a very low offer for the writing desk. I thought the dealer 
would possibly accept it. In that case, it would be a coinci- 
dence that played into my hands. It certainly was not for the 


Preface 5 


sake of the money that I acted this way, but for the sake of my 
conscience. It misfired; the dealer was exceptionally rigid. For 
atime, I again walked by every day and gazed at the desk with 
enamored eyes. You must make up your mind, I thought. 
Suppose it is sold; then it is too late, and even if you managed 
to get hold of it again, you still would never have the same 
impression of it. My heart pounded when I went into the 
shop. I bought it and paid for it. This is the last time you are 
going to be so prodigal, I thought. In fact, it is really lucky that 
you did buy it, for every time you look at it you will be re- 
minded of how prodigal you were; with this desk commences 
a new period in your life. Ah, desire is very eloquent, and 
good intentions are always on hand. 


The writing desk was set up in my apartment, and just as in 
the first phase of my infatuation I had my pleasure in gazing at 
it from the street, so now I walked by it here at home. Grad- 
ually I learned to know its numerous features, its many draw- 
ers and compartments, and in every respect I was happy with 
my desk. But it was not to remain that way. In the summer of 
1836, my duties allowed me to make a little journey to the 
country for a week. Arrangements were made with the coach- 
man for five o’clock in the morning. The clothes I needed to 
take along had been packed the previous evening; everything 
was in order. I was already awake at four o’clock, but the pic- 
ture of the beautiful countryside I was going to visit had such 
an intoxicating effect on me that I fell asleep again or into a 
dream. Presumably my servant wanted me to have all the 
sleep I could get, for he did not call me until six-thirty. The 
coachman was already blowing his horn, and although ordi- 
narily I am disinclined to obey the orders of others, I have al- 
ways made an exception of a coachman and his poetic motifs. 
I dressed quickly and was already at the door when the 
thought crossed my mind: Do you have enough money in 
your pocketbook? There was not much. I opened the desk to 
pull out the money drawer and take what happened to be at 
hand. But the drawer would not budge. Every expedient was 
futile. It was a most calamitous situation. To run into such dif- 


viii 


6 Either/Or, I 


ficulties at the very moment when the coachman’s enticing 
tones were still ringing in my ears! The blood rushed to my 
head; I was furious. Just as Xerxes had the sea whipped,‘ so I 
decided to take dreadful revenge. A hatchet was fetched. I 
gave the desk a terrible blow with it. Whether in my rage I 
aimed wrong or the drawer was just as stubborn as I, the result 
was not what was intended. The drawer was shut, and the 
drawer stayed shut. But something else happened. Whether 
my blow struck precisely this spot or the vibration through 
the entire structure of the desk was the occasion, I do not 
know, but this I do know—a secret door that I had never no- 
ticed before sprung open. This door closed off a compartment 
that I obviously had not discovered. Here, to my great amaze- 
ment, I found a mass of papers, the papers that constitute the 
contents of the present publication. My decision remained un- 
changed. At the first post house, I would borrow some 
money. In the greatest haste, a mahogany box that usually 
contained a pair of pistols was emptied and the papers depos- 
ited into it. Joy was victorious and had gained an unexpected 
augmentation. In my heart, I begged the desk’s forgiveness for 
the rough treatment, while my thought found its suspicion 
strengthened—that the outer is certainly not the inner—and 
my experiential thesis was confirmed: it takes a stroke of luck 
to make such discoveries. 


In the middle of the forenoon, I reached Hillerad,5 straight- 
ened out my finances, and gained an overall impression of the 
glorious region. Right away the next morning, I began my ex- 
cursions, which now took on quite another character than | 
originally had intended. My servant accompanied me with the 
mahogany box. I looked for a romantic spot in the forest 
where I would be as safe as possible from any surprise and 
there took out the documents. The innkeeper, noticing these 
frequent rambles in the company of a mahogany box, volun- 
teered that perhaps I was practicing shooting with my pistols. 
I was much obliged to him for this remark and let him con- 
tinue under that impression. 


A quick look at the discovered papers readily showed me 
that they formed two groups, with a marked external differ- 


Preface 7 


ence as well. The one was written on a kind of letter-vellum, 
in quarto, with a rather wide margin. The handwriting was 
legible, sometimes even a bit meticulous, in one place slov- 
enly. The other was written on full sheets of beehive paper® 
with ruled columns such as legal documents and the like are 
written on. The handwriting was distinct, somewhat drawn 
out, uniform and even; it seemed to be that of a businessman. 
The contents immediately appeared to be different also: the 
one contained a number of esthetic essays of varying lengths; 
the other consisted of two long studies and a shorter one, all 
with ethical content, it seemed, and in the form of letters. On 
closer inspection, this difference was entirely confirmed. The 
latter group does indeed consist of letters written to the author 
of the first group. 

But it is necessary to find a more concise expression to char- 
acterize the two authors. With that in mind, I have gone 
through the papers very carefully but have found nothing or 
practically nothing. As far as the first author, the esthete, is 
concerned, there is no information at all about him. As far as 
the other, the letter writer, is concerned, we learn that his 
name is William and that he has been a judge, but the court is 
not stipulated. If 1 were to hold scrupulously to the historical 
and call him William, I would lack a corresponding designa- 
tion for the first author; I would be obliged to give him an ar- 
bitrary name. For this reason, I have preferred to call the first 
author A, the second B. 

Besides the longer pieces, a number of scraps of paper were 
found on which were written aphorisms, lyrical utterances 
and reflections. The handwriting itself indicated that they be- 
longed to A, and the contents confirmed this. 

Then I tried to organize the papers in the best manner. With 
B’s papers it was rather easy to do. One letter presupposes the 
other. In the second letter, we find a quotation from the first; 
the third letter presupposes the two preceding ones. 

Organizing A’s papers was not so easy. Therefore I have let 
chance fix the order—that is, I have let them remain in the or- 
der in which I found them, without, of course, being able to 
decide whether this order has chronological value or ideal sig- 
nificance. The scraps of paper lay loose in the compartment, 


8 Either/Or, I 


and I therefore had to assign them a place. I have placed them 
first, because it seemed to me that they could best be regarded 
as preliminary glimpses into what the longer pieces develop 
more coherently. I have called them Atawéuata’ and added 
as a kind of motto: ad se ipsum [to himself].° In a way, this title 
and the motto are by me and yet not by me. They are by me 
insofar as they are applied to the whole collection, but they be- 
long to A himself, for the word AtawpdéApota was written on 
one of the scraps of paper, and on two of them appear the 
words ad se ipsum. In keeping with what A himself has often 
done, I have also had printed on the inside of the title page a 
short French poem found above one of these aphorisms. Inas- 
much as the majority of these aphorisms have a lyrical form, I 
thought it appropriate to use the word AvayéAuata as the gen- 
eral title. If the reader considers this an unfortunate choice, I 
owe it to the truth to admit that it is my own idea and that the 
word certainly was used with discrimination by A himself for 
the aphorism over which it was found. ?The ordering of the 
individual aphorisms I have left to chance. That the particular 
expressions often contradict one another, I found entirely ap- 
propriate, for this indeed belongs essentially to the mood; I de- 
cided it was not worth the trouble to arrange them so the con- 
tradictions were less obvious. I followed chance, and it is also 
chance that called my attention to the fact that the first and last 
aphorisms are somewhat complementary in that the one pierc- 
ingly feels, as it were, the pain of being a poet, and the other 
relishes the satisfaction in always having the laughter on one’s 
side. 


As far as A’s esthetic treatises are concerned, there is nothing 
about them that I would stress. They were all ready for print- 
ing, and if they contain any difficulties, I must let them speak 
for themselves. For my part, may I point out that to the Greek 
quotations found here and there I have added a translation 
taken from one of the better German translations. 


10The last of A’s papers is a narrative titled “The Seducer’s 
Diary.” Here we meet new difficulties, inasmuch as A does 
not declare himself the author but only the editor. This is an 


Preface 9 


old literary device to which I would not have much to object 
if it did not further complicate my own position, since one au- 
thor becomes enclosed within the other like the boxes in a 
Chinese puzzle. This is not the place to explain in greater detail 
what confirms me in my view; I shall only point out that the 
prevailing mood in A’s preface somehow manifests the poet. 
It really seems as if A himself had become afraid of his fic- 
tion, !'which, like a troubled dream, continued to make him 
feel uneasy, also in the telling. If it was an actual event of 
which he had secret knowledge, then I find it strange that the 
preface carries no trace of A’s joy over seeing the realization of 
the idea he had often vaguely entertained. The idea of the se- 
ducer is suggested in the piece on the immediate erotic as well 
as in “Silhouettes” —namely, that the counterpart to Don Gio- 
vanni must be a reflective seducer in the category of the inter- 
esting, !2 where the issue therefore is not how many he seduces 
but how. I find no trace of such joy in the preface but indeed, 
as noted previously, a trepidation, a certain horror, that pre- 
sumably has its basis in his poetic relation to this idea. And A’s 
reaction does not surprise me, for I, too, who have nothing at 
all to do with this narrative—indeed, am twice removed from 
the original author—I, too, sometimes have felt quite 
strangely uneasy when I have been occupied with these papers 
in the stillness of the night. It seemed to me as if the seducer 
himself paced my floor like a shadow, as if he glanced at the 
papers, as if he fixed his demonic eyes on me, and said, ‘““Well, 
well, so you want to publish my papers! You know that is ir- 
responsible of you; you will indeed arouse anxiety in the dar- 
ling girls. But, of course, in recompense you will make me and 
my kind innocuous. There you are mistaken, for I merely 
change the method, and so my situation is all the more advan- 
tageous. What a flock of young girls will run straight into a 
man’s arms when they hear the seductive name: a seducer! 
Give me half a year, and I will produce a story that will be ever 
so much more interesting than everything I have so far expe- 
rienced. I picture to myself a young, energetic girl of genius 
having the extraordinary idea of wanting to avenge her sex on 
me. She thinks she will be able to coerce me, to make me taste 
the pains of unhappy love. That, you see, is a girl for me. If she 


xii 


10 Either/Or, I 


herself does not think of it profoundly enough, I shall come to 
her assistance. I shall writhe like the Molbos’ eel.'3 And when 
I have brought her to the point where I want her, then she is 
mine.”” 


But perhaps I have already misused my position as editor to 
burden the readers with my observations. The situation must 
be my excuse; the dubiousness of my position, owing to A’s 
calling himself the editor and not the author of this narrative, 
allowed me to be carried away. 

Anything else [ have to add about this narrative I can do only 
in my role as editor. That is, I believe that in this narrative 
there is a specification of time. Here and there in the diary a 
date is given, but the year is lacking. Thus, I seem unable to go 
further, but I believe that by scrutinizing the dates more 
closely I have found a lead. Admittedly, every year has an 
April 7, aJuly 3, an August 2, etc., but it by no means follows 
that April 7 is a Monday every year. I have done some check- 
ing and have found out that this specification fits the year 1834. 
Whether A has thought of this, I cannot decide, but I hardly 
think so, for in that case he would not have taken as much pre- 
caution as he otherwise does. Nor does the diary say: Monday, 
April 7, etc. It says merely: April 7. In fact, the entry begins 
like this: So, on Monday—and attention is thereby diverted, 
but by reading through the entry under this date one sees that 
it must have been a Monday. I have, then, a specified time for 
this narrative, but every attempt I have made so far to use it to 
determine the time of the other treatises has failed. I could just 
as well have assigned it place number three, but, as I said be- 
fore, I have preferred to let chance prevail, and everything re- 
mains in the order in which I found it. 


As far as B’s papers are concerned, they order themselves 
easily and naturally. But I did make one change in them: I have 
permitted myself to give them titles, because the letter form 
made it difficult for the author to give a title to these inquiries. 
Should the reader, therefore, after familiarizing himself with 
the contents, find that the titles were not felicitously chosen, I 
shall always be willing to put up with the pain inherent in hav- 


Preface 11 


ing done something wrong when one wanted to do something 
well. 

Occasionally there is in the margin a comment, which I 
have made into a footnote lest I encroach distractingly upon 
the text. 

As far as B’s manuscript is concerned, I have not permitted 
myself to make any changes whatsoever but have scrupu- 
lously regarded it as a document. Perhaps I could easily have 
deleted an occasional negligence, which is quite understanda- 
ble when one considers that he is merely a letter writer. I did 
not wish to do so, because I feared going too far. When B sup- 
poses that out of a hundred people who go astray in the world 
ninety-nine are saved by women and one by divine grace," it 
is easy to see that he is not very good in mathematics, inas- 
much as he gives no place to those who are actually lost. I 
could easily have made a little change in the numbers, but to 
me there is something much more beautiful in B’s miscalcu- 
lation. In another place, B mentions a Greek wise man by the 
name of Myson and relates that he enjoyed the rare good for- 
tune of being counted among the seven sages, when their 
number is set at fourteen. '&gt; For a while, I was perplexed about 
the source of B’s wisdom and also about which Greek author 
he could be quoting. I immediately suspected that it was Di- 
ogenes Laertius,'® and by checking Jocher’’ and Moréri!® I did 
indeed find reference to him. B’s account might very well need 
correction, for the matter does not stand just as he relates, even 
though among the ancients there is some uncertainty in the 
designation of who the seven sages were, but I still did not 
think it worth the trouble; it seemed to me that his remark, 
even though not exactly historical, did have another value. 

As early as five years ago, I had reached the point where Iam 
at present; I had ordered the papers as they are now arranged, 
had decided to publish them, but nevertheless felt it was best 
to wait for a time. I considered five years a suitable interval. 
These five years are over, and I begin where] left off. Presum- 
ably I need not reassure the reader that I have not left untried 
any means of tracing the authors. The secondhand dealer did 
not keep records, which, as is commonly known, is rarely the 


xii 


xiv 


12 Either/Or, I 


case with secondhand dealers; he did not know from whom he 
had purchased that piece of furniture. He seemed to remember 
buying it at a mixed auction. I shall not venture to tell the 
reader about the many futile attempts that have cost me so 
much time, so much the less because recollection of them is no 
pleasure to me. I can share the results with the reader very 
briefly, for the results were nothing at all. 


As I was about to carry out my decision to publish these pa- 
pers, I had one particular misgiving. Perhaps the reader will 
permit me to speak quite candidly. The question occurred to 
me whether I might not become guilty of an indiscretion to- 
ward the unknown authors. But the more familiar I became 
with the papers, the more that misgiving diminished. The pa- 
pers were of such a nature that, despite all my careful scrutiny, 
they yielded no information. A reader would be even less 
likely to find anything, since I do presume to be the equal of 
any reader, not in taste and sympathy and insight, but cer- 
tainly in diligence and indefatigability. Therefore, if it was as- 
sumed that the unknown authors were still alive, that they 
lived here in the city, that they would unexpectedly recognize 
their own papers—nevertheless, nothing would result from 
the publication, provided that the authors themselves re- 
mained silent, for, in the most rigorous sense, these papers, as 
is ordinarily said of all printed matter, are silent. 

Another misgiving I had was in and by itself less important, 
fairly easy to dismiss, and has been dismissed even more easily 
than I had expected. It occurred to me, namely, that these pa- 
pers could become a financial consideration. | thought that it 
would be quite proper for me to accept a little honorarium for 
my pains as editor, but I would have to regard an author’s 
honorarium as much too large. Just as the honest Scottish 
farmers in The White Lady’? decide to buy the estate and culti- 
vate it and then give it to the earls of Evenel if they should ever 
come back, so I decided to invest the honorarium on behalf of 
the unknown authors in order, if they should ever come for- 
ward, to be able to give them the whole amount together with 
interest and interest on the interest. If the reader has not al- 


Preface 13 


ready decided on the basis of my complete awkwardness that 
I am no author, nor a literary man who makes a profession of 
being an editor, then the naiveté of this reasoning will surely 
remove all doubts. This misgiving, then, was dismissed far 
more easily, for an author’s honorarium in Denmark is no ma- 
norial estate, and the unknown authors would have to stay 
away a long time before their honorarium, even with interest 
and interest on the interest, would become a financial consid- 
eration. 


All that remained was only to give these papers a title. I 
could call them Papers, Posthumous Papers, Found Papers, 
Lost Papers, etc. There is, of course, a multiplicity of varia- 
tions, but none of these titles satisfied me. In determining the 
title, I have therefore allowed myself some freedom, a decep- 
tion for which I shall attempt to give an accounting. In my 
continual preoccupation with these papers, it dawned on me 
that they might take on a new aspect if they were regarded as 
belonging to one person. I know very well all the objections 
that could be made against this view—that it is unhistorical, 
and that it is improbable inasmuch as it is unreasonable that 
one person could be the author of both parts, although the 
reader could easily be tempted by the pun that ?°when one has 
said A, one must also say B. Nevertheless I have been unable 
to abandon the idea. So, then, there was a person who in his 
lifetime had experienced both movements or had reflected 
upon both movements. A’s papers contain a multiplicity of ap- 
proaches to an esthetic view of life. A coherent esthetic view 
of life can hardly be presented. B’s papers contain an ethical 
view of life. As I allowed my soul to be influenced by this 
thought, it became clear to me that I could let it guide me in 
determining the title. The title I have chosen expresses pre- 
cisely this. The reader cannot lose much because of this title, 
for during his reading he may very well forget the title. Then, 
when he has read the book, he can perhaps think of the title. 
This will release him from every final question—whether A 
actually was persuaded and repented, whether B was victo- 
rious, or whether perhaps B finally came around to A’s think- 


xv 


Xvi 


14 Either/Or, I 


ing. In this respect, these papers come to no conclusion. If 
someone finds this inappropriate, he is stil] not justified in call- 
ing it a defect but ought to call it a misfortune. I for my part 
regard it as a piece of good fortune. We sometimes come upon 
novels in which specific characters represent contrasting views 
of life. They usually end with one persuading the other. The 
point of view ought to speak for itself, but instead the reader is 
furnished with the historical result that the other was per- 
suaded. I consider it fortunate that these papers provide no en- 
lightenment in this respect. Whether A wrote the esthetic 
pieces after receiving B’s letters, whether his soul subse- 
quently continued to flounder around in its wild unruliness or 
whether it calmed down—I do not find myself capable of of- 
fering the slightest enlightenment about this, inasmuch as the 
papers contain nothing. Neither do they contain any hint as to 
how it went with B, whether he was able to hold fast to his 
point of view or not. Thus, when the book is read, A and B 
are forgotten; only the points of view confront each other and 
expect no final decision in the particular personalities. 


I have nothing more to say, except that it occurred to me 
that the honored authors, if they were aware of my undertak- 
ing, might wish to complement their papers with a word to 
the reader. I shall therefore add a few words with a guided pen. 
A presumably would have no objection to the publication of 
the papers,”! and he probably would shout to the reader, 
“Read them or do not read them, you will regret it either 
way.” What B would say is more difficult to determine. He 
perhaps would reproach me for something or other, especially 
with regard to the publication of A’s papers; he would make 
me feel that he had no part in it, that he would wash his hands. 
Having done that, he perhaps would address the book with 
these words: “Go out into the world, then; avoid, if possible, 
the attention of the critics; visit an individual reader in a favor- 
ably disposed hour, and if you should encounter a reader of the 
fair sex, then I would say: My charming reader, in this book 
you will find something that you perhaps should not know, 
something else from which you will presumably benefit by 


Preface 15 


coming to know it. Read, then, the something in such a way 
that, having read it, you may be as one who has not read it; 
read the something else in such a way that, having read it, you 
may be as one who has not forgotten what has been read.” As 
editor, { shall add only the wish that the book may meet the 
reader in a favorably disposed hour and that the charming 
reader may succeed in scrupulously following B’s well-inten- 
tioned advice.** 


November 1842 
EpIToR 


AIAWAAMATA'! 


ad se ipsum 
[to himself]? 


Grandeur, savoir, renommeée, 
Amitié, plaisir et bien, 
Tout n’est que vent, que fumée: 
Pour mieux dire, tout n’est rien 
[Greatness, knowledge, renown, 
Friendship, pleasure and possessions, 
Allis only wind, only smoke: 
To say it better, all is nothing].? 


4What is a poet? An unhappy person who conceals profound 
anguish in his heart but whose lips are so formed that as sighs 
and cries pass over them they sound like beautiful music. It is 
with him as with the poor wretches in Phalaris’s bronze bull, 
who were slowly tortured over a slow fire; their screams could 
not reach the tyrant’s ears to terrify him; to him they sounded 
like sweet music.° And people crowd around the poet and say 
to him, ‘‘Sing again soon’”’—in other words, may new suffer- 
ings torture your soul, and may your lips continue to be 
formed as before, because your screams would only alarm us, 
but the music is charming. And the reviewers step up and say, 
“That is right; so it must be according to the rules of esthet- 
ics.” Now of course a reviewer resembles a poet to a hair, ex- 
cept that he does not have the anguish in his heart, or the music 
on his lips. Therefore, I would rather be a swineherd out on 
Amager® and be understood by swine than be a poet and be 
misunderstood by people.’ 


It is common knowledge that the first question in the first 
and most compendious instruction given to a child is this: 
What does baby want? The answer is: Da-da.8 And with such 
observations life begins, and yet we deny hereditary sin.? And 
yet whom does the child have to thank for his first thrashings, 
whom else but his parents. 


I prefer to talk with children, for one may still dare to hope 
that they may become rational beings; but those who have be- 
come that—good Lord!!° 


How unreasonable people are! They never use the freedoms 
they have but demand those they do not have; they have free- 
dom of thought—they demand freedom of speech. 


20 Either/Or, I 


"Tl don’t feel like doing anything. I don’t feel like riding— 
the motion is too powerful; I don’t feel like walking—it is too 
tiring; I don’t feel like lying down, for either I would have to 
stay down, and I don’t feel like doing that, or I would have to 
get up again, and I don’t feel like doing that, either. Summa 
Summarum: I don’t feel like doing anything. 


There are, as is known, insects that die in the moment of fer- 
tilization. So it is with all joy: life’s highest, most splendid mo- 
ment of enjoyment is accompanied by death. 


Tested Advice for Authors"? 


One carelessly writes down one’s personal observations, has 
them printed, and in the various proofs one will eventually ac- 
quire a number of good ideas. Therefore, take courage, you 
who have not yet dared to have something printed. Do not de- 
spise typographical errors, ‘4 and to become witty by means of 
typographical errors may be considered a legitimate way to 
become witty. 


'5Generally speaking, the imperfection in everything human 
is that its aspirations are achieved only by way of their oppo- 
sites. I shall not discuss the variety of formations, which can 
give a psychologist plenty to do (the melancholy have the best 
sense of the comic, the most opulent often the best sense of the 
rustic, the dissolute often the best sense of the moral, the 
doubter often the best sense of the religious), but merely call 
to mind that it is through sin that one gains a first glimpse of 
salvation. 


'6In addition to my other numerous acquaintances, I have 
one more intimate confidant—my depression. In the midst of 
my joy, in the midst of my work, he!” beckons to me, calls me 
aside, even though physically I remain on the spot. My 
depression is the most faithful mistress I have known—no 
wonder, then, that I return the love. 


Diapsalmata 21 


There is a rambling of loquacity'® that in its interminability 
has the same relation to the result as the incalculable lists of 
Egyptian kings have to the historical outcome. 


Old age fulfills the dreams of youth. One sees this in Swift: 
in his youth he built an insane asylum; in his old age he himself 
entered it.!? 


20It is cause for alarm to note with what hypochondriac pro- 
fundity Englishmen of an earlier generation have spotted the 
ambiguity basic to laughter. Thus Dr. Hartley?! has observed: 
dass wenn sich das Lachen zuerst bei Kindern zeiget, so ist es 
ein entstehendes Weinen, welches durch Schmerz erregt wird, 
oder ein plétzlich gehemtes und in sehr kurzen Zwi- 
schenraiimen wiederholtes Gefiihl des Schmerzens [that when 
laughter first makes its appearance in the child, it is a nascent 
cry that is excited by pain or a suddenly arrested feeling of pain 
repeated at very short intervals] (see Flégel, Geschichte der comi- 
schen Litteratur,” I, p. 50). What if everything in the world 
were a misunderstanding; what if laughter really were weep- 
ing! 


There are particular occasions when one may be most 
painfully moved to see a person standing utterly alone in the 
world. The other day I saw a poor girl walking utterly alone 
to church to be confirmed. 


24Cornelius Nepos tells of a general who was kept confined 
with a considerable cavalry regiment in a fortress; to keep the 
horses from being harmed because of too much inactivity, he 
had them whipped daily*—in like manner, I live in this age as 
one besieged, but lest I be harmed by sitting still so much, I cry 
myself tired. 


6] say of my sorrow what the Englishman says of his house: 
My sorrow is my castle.2?7 Many people look upon having sor- 
row as one of life’s conveniences. 


22 Either/Or, I 


28] feel as a chessman must feel when the opponent says of it: 
That piece cannot be moved. 


29 Aladdin® is so very refreshing because this piece has the au- 
dacity of the child, of the genius, in the wildest wishes. Indeed, 
how many are there in our day who truly dare to wish, dare to 
desire, dare to address nature neither with a polite child’s bitte, 
bitte [please, please] nor with the raging frenzy of one damned? 
How many are there who—inspired by what is talked about so 
much in our age, that man is created in God’s image—have 
the authentic voice of command? Or do we not all stand like 
Noureddin, bowing and scraping, worrying about asking too 
much or too little? Or is not every magnificent demanding 
eventually diminished to morbid reflecting over the I, from in- 
sisting to informing, which we are indeed brought up and 
trained to do. 


3'T am as timorous as a sheva,*? as weak and muted as a dag- 
hesch lene; | feel like a letter printed backward in the line, and 
yet as uncontrollable as a pasha with three horse tails,*4 as so- 
licitous for myselfand my thoughts as a bank for its banknotes, 
indeed, as reflected into myself as any pronomen reflexivum [re- 
flexive pronoun]. Yes, if it were true of miseries and sorrows 
as it is true of conscious good deeds—that those who do them 
lose their reward—then I would be the happiest person, for I 
take all my cares in advance, and yet they all remain behind. 


The tremendous poetical power of folk literature is mani- 
fest, among other ways, in its power to desire. In comparison, 
desire in our age is simultaneously sinful and boring, because 
it desires what belongs to the neighbor. Desire in folk litera- 
ture is fully aware that the neighbor does not possess what it 
seeks any more than it does itself. And if it is going to desire 
sinfully, then it is so flagrant that people must be shocked. It is 
not going to let itself be beaten down by the cold probability 
calculations of a pedestrian understanding. Don Juan still 
strides across the stage with his 1,003 ladyloves. Out of rev- 
erence for the venerableness of tradition, no one dares to 


Diapsalmata 23 


smile. If a poet had dared to do this in our age, he would be 
laughed to scorn. 


What a strange, sad mood came over me on seeing a poor 
wretch shuffling through the streets in a somewhat worn pale 
green coat flecked with yellow.* I felt sorry for him, but 
nevertheless what affected me most was that the color of this 
coat so vividly reminded me of my childhood’s first produc- 
tions in the noble art of painting. This particular color was one 
of my favorite colors. Is it not sad that these color combina- 
tions, which I still think of with so much joy, are nowhere to 
be found in life; the whole world finds them crude, garish, 
suitable only for Nurnberg prints.*° If they are encountered 
occasionally, the meeting is always unfortunate, as this one is. 
It is always a feeble-minded person or a derelict—in short, al- 
ways someone who feels alienated in life and whom the world 
will not acknowledge. And I, who always painted my heroes 
with this eternally unforgettable yellow-green tinge to their 
coats! Does this not happen with all the color combinations of 
childhood? The gleam that life had at that time gradually be- 
comes too intense, too crude, for our dull eyes. 


3’Alas, fortune’s door does not open inward so that one can 
push it open by rushing at it; but it opens outward, and there- 
fore one can do nothing about it. 


8] have, I believe, the courage to doubt everything; I have, 
I believe, the courage to fight against everything; but I do not 
have the courage to acknowledge anything, the courage to 
possess, to own, anything. Most people complain that the 
world is so prosaic that things do not go in life as in the novel, 
where opportunity is always so favorable. I complain that in 
life it is not as in the novel, where one has hardhearted fathers 
and nisses and trolls to battle, and enchanted princesses to free. 
What are all such adversaries together compared with the pale, 
bloodless, tenacious-of-life nocturnal forms with which I bat- 
tle and to which I myself give life and existence. 


24 Either/Or, I 


How sterile my soul and my mind are, and yet constantly 
tormented by empty voluptuous and excruciating labor pains! 
Will the tongue ligament of my spirit never be loosened; will I 
always jabber? “What I need is a voice as piercing as the glance 
of Lynceus,*! as terrifying as the groan of the giants,*? as sus- 
tained as a sound of nature,*® as mocking as an icy gust of 
wind, as malicious as echo’s heartless taunting, extending in 
range from the deepest bass to the most melting high notes, 
and modulated from a solemn-silent whisper to the energy of 
rage. That is what I need in order to breathe, to give voice to 
what is on my mind, to have the viscera of both anger and 
sympathy shaken. —But my voice is only hoarse like the 
scream of a gull or moribund like the blessing on the lips of the 
mute. 


What is going to happen? What will the future bring? I do 
not know, I have no presentiment. “When a spider flings itself 
from a fixed point down into its consequences, it continually 
sees before it an empty space in which it can find no foothold, 
however much it stretches. So it is with me; before me is con- 
tinually an empty space, and I am propelled by a consequence 
that lies behind me. This life is turned around and dreadful, 
not to be endured. 


“The most beautiful time is the first period of falling in 
love, when, from every encounter, every glance, one fetches 
home something new to rejoice over. 


46My observation of life makes no sense at all. I suppose that 
an evil spirit has put a pair of glasses on my nose, one lens of 
which magnifies on an immense scale and the other reduces on 
the same scale. 


The doubter is Mevaotryopévosg [one who is whipped];* like 
a spinning top, he remains on the point for a shorter or longer 
period depending on the strokes of the whip; he is not able to 
remain on the point any more than the top is.** 


Diapsalmata 25 


The most ludicrous of all ludicrous things, it seems to me, 
is to be busy in the world, to be a man who is brisk at his meals 
and brisk at his work. Therefore, when I see a fly settle on the 
nose of one of those men of business in a decisive moment, *? 
or if he is splashed by a carriage that passes him in even greater 
haste, or Knippelsbro® tilts up, or a roof tile falls and kills 
him,*! I laugh from the bottom of my heart. And who could 
keep from laughing? What, after all, do these busy bustlers 
achieve? Are they not just like that woman who, in a flurry be- 
cause the house was on fire, rescued the fire tongs? What 
more, after all, do they salvage from life’s huge conflagration? 


On the whole, I lack the patience to live. I cannot see the 
grass grow, and if I cannot do that, I do not care to look at it at 
all. My views are the superficial observations of a ‘‘fahrender 
Scholastiker [traveling scholastic]? who dashes through life in 
the greatest haste. It is said that our Lord satisfies the stomach 
before the eyes. That is not what I find: my eyes are surfeited 
and bored with everything, and yet I hunger. 


54Ask me what you wish; just do not ask me for reasons. A 
young girl is excused for not being able to state reasons; she 
lives in feelings, it is said. It is different with me. Ordinarily I 
have so many and most often such mutually contradictory rea- 
sons that for this reason it is impossible for me to state reasons. 
It also seems to me that with cause and effect the relation does 
not hold together properly. Sometimes enormous and gewal- 
tige [powerful] causes produce a very klein [small] and insig- 
nificant little effect, sometimes none at all; sometimes a nimble 
little cause produces a colossal effect. 


&gt;And now the innocent pleasures of life. It must be granted 
to them that they have only one flaw—that they are so inno- 
cent. Moreover, they are to be enjoyed in moderation. When 
my physician prescribes a diet for me, there is some reason in 
that; I abstain from certain specified foods for a certain speci- 
fied time. But to be dietetic in keeping the diet—that is really 
asking too much. 


10 


26 Either/Or, I 


Life for me has become a bitter drink, and yet it must be 
taken in drops, slowly, counting. 


No one comes back from the dead; no one has come into the 
world without weeping. No one asks when one wants to 
come in; no one asks when one wants to go out. 


Time passes, life is a stream, etc., so people say. That is not 
what I find: time stands still, and so do I. All the plans I project 
fly straight back at me; when I want to spit, I spit in my own 
face. 


56When I get up in the morning, I go right back to bed again. 
I feel best in the evening the moment I put out the light and 
pull the feather-bed over my head. I sit up once more, look 
around the room with indescribable satisfaction, and then 
good night, down under the feather-bed. 


What am I good for? For nothing or for anything whatever. 
It is a rare ability; I wonder if it will be appreciated in life? God 
knows whether places are found by girls looking for a job as a 
general servant or, for want of that, as anything whatever. 


57One ought to be a riddle not only to others but also to one- 
self. | examine myself; when I am tired of that, I smoke a cigar 
for diversion and think: God knows what our Lord actually in- 
tended with me or what he wants to make of me. 


33No woman in maternity confinement can have stranger 
and more impatient wishes than I have. Sometimes these 
wishes involve the most insignificant things, sometimes the 
most sublime, but they all have to an equally high degree the 
momentary passion of the soul. At this moment I wish for a 
bowl of buckwheat cereal. I recall from my school days that 
we always had buckwheat cereal on Wednesdays. I recall how 
smooth and white the cereal was served, how the butter 
smiled at me, how warm the cereal looked, how hungry I was, 
how impatient to get permission to begin. Such a bowl of 


Diapsalmata 27 


buckwheat cereal! I would give more than my birthright*? for 
it. 


Virgilius[sic] the sorcerer®' had himself hacked to pieces 
and put in a caldron to be cooked for eight days in order by this 
process to be rejuvenated. He arranged for someone to watch 
so that no interloper would peer into the caldron. But the 
watchman could not resist the temptation; it was too soon, 
and Virgilius, as an infant, disappeared with a scream. I dare 
say that I also peered too soon into the caldron, into the cald- 
ron of life and the historical process, and most likely will never 
manage to become more than a child. 


“Never lose courage! When troubles pile up most appal- 
lingly about you, you will see a helping hand in the clouds” — 
so said His Reverence Jesper Morten® at vespers recently. 
Well, I am accustomed to walking a great deal under the open 
sky, but I have never noticed such a thing. A few days ago 
while on a walking tour, I became aware of such a phenome- 
non. It was really not a hand, but more like an arm, that 
reached out of the cloud. I fell into contemplation, and the 
thought came to me: If only Jesper Morten were here so he 
could decide whether this was the phenomenon he referred to. 
As I stood there lost in these thoughts, a passerby addressed 
me and said as he pointed up to the clouds, ‘Do you see that 
funnel-shaped cloud? One seldom sees such a thing in these 
parts. Sometimes it carries whole houses along with it.”” Good 
heavens, I thought, is that a funnel-shaped cloud—and took to 
my heels as fast as I could. What would His Reverence Jesper 
Morten have done, I wonder, in my place? 


Let others complain that the times are evil. I complain that 
they are wretched, for they are without passion. People’s 
thoughts are as thin and fragile as lace, and they themselves as 
pitiable as lace-making girls. The thoughts of their hearts are 
too wretched to be sinful. It is perhaps possible to regard it as 
sin for a worm to nourish such thoughts, but not for a human 
being, who is created in the image of God. Their desires are 


28 Either/Or, I 


staid and dull, their passions drowsy. They perform their du- 
ties, these mercenary souls, but just like the Jews, they indulge 
in trimming the coins a little; they think that, “even though 
our Lord keeps ever so orderly an account book, they can still 
manage to trick him a little. Fie on them! That is why my soul 
always turns back to the Old Testament and to Shakespeare. 
There one still feels that those who speak are human beings; 
there they hate, there they love, there they murder the enemy, 
curse his descendants through all generations—there they sin. 


My time I divide as follows: the one half sleep; the other 
half I dream. I never dream when I sleep; that would be a 
shame, because to sleep is the height of genius. 


To be a perfect human being is indeed the highest. Now I 
have corns—that is always of some help. 


My life achievement amounts to nothing at all, a mood, a 
single color. My achievement resembles the painting by that 
artist who was supposed to paint the Israelites’ crossing of the 
Red Sea and to that end painted the entire wall red and ex- 
plained that the Israelites had walked across and that the Egyp- 
tians were drowned. 


Human dignity is still acknowledged even in nature, for 
when we want to keep birds away from the trees we set up 
something that is supposed to resemble a human being, and 
even the remote resemblance a scarecrow has to a human 
being is sufficient to inspire respect. 


If erotic love [Elskov] is to have any meaning, in its hour of 
birth it must be shone upon by the moon, just as Apis, in order 
to be the true Apis, must have been shone upon by the moon. 
The cow that gave birth to Apis is said to have been shone 
upon by the moon in the moment of conception.© 


The best demonstration of the wretchedness of life 
[ Tilverelse] is that which is obtained through a consideration 
of its glory. 


Diapsalmata 29 


Most people rush after pleasure so fast that they rush right 
past it. They are like that dwarf who guarded a kidnapped 
princess in his castle. One day he took a noon nap. When he 
woke up an hour later, she was gone. Hastily he pulls on his 
seven-league boots; with one step he is far past her. 


SMy soul is so heavy that no thought can carry it any 
longer, no wing beat can lift it up into the ether any more. If it 
is moved, it merely skims along the ground, just as birds fly 
low when a thunderstorm is blowing up. Over my inner being 
broods an oppressiveness, an anxiety, that forebodes an earth- 
quake. 


How empty and meaningless life is. —We bury a man; we 
accompany him to the grave, throw three spadefuls of earth on 
him; we ride out in a carriage, ride home in a carriage; we find 
consolation in the thought that we have a long life ahead of us. 
But how long is seven times ten years? Why not settle it all at 
once, why not stay out there and go along down into the grave 
and draw lots to see to whom will befall the misfortune of 
being the last of the living who throws the last three spadefuls 
of earth on the last of the dead? 


67Girls do not appeal to me. Their beauty passes away like a 
dream and like yesterday when it is past. Their faithfulness— 
yes, their faithfulness! Either they are faithless—this does not 
concern me any more—or they are faithful. If I found such a 
one, she would appeal to me from the standpoint of her being 
a rarity; but from the standpoint of a long period of time she 
would not appeal to me, for either she would continually re- 
main faithful, and then I would become a sacrifice to my ea- 
gerness for experience, since I would have to bear with her, or 
the time would come when she would lapse, and then I would 
have the same old story. 


©°Wretched fate! In vain do you prink up your wrinkled face 
like an old prostitute, in vain do you jingle your fool’s bells. 
You bore me; it is still the same, an idem per idem [the same by 


30 Either/Or, I 


the same]. No variation, always a rehash. Come, sleep and 
death; you promise nothing, you hold everything. 


Those two familiar violin strains! Those two familiar vio- 
lin strains here this very moment out in the street. Have I lost 
my mind; out of love for Mozart’s music, have my ears ceased 
to hear? Is this a reward of the gods, to give unhappy me, who 
sits like a beggar at the door of the temple,”! ears that them- 
selves perform what they hear? Only those two violin strains, 
for now I hear nothing more. Just as in that immortal 
overture” they burst forth out of the deep chorale tones, so 
here they disentangle themselves from the noise and tumult of 
the street with the total surprise of a revelation. —It must be 
close by, for now I hear the light dance tunes. —So it is to you 
that I owe this joy, you two unfortunate artists. —One of 
them was probably seventeen years old, wearing a green Kal- 
muk coat with large bone buttons. The coat was much too 
large for him. He held the violin tightly under his chin; his cap 
was pulled down over his eyes. His hand was concealed in a 
fingerless glove; his fingers were red and blue with cold. The 
other one was older and wore a chenille coat. Both were blind. 
A little girl, who presumably guided them, stood in front of 
them, thrust her hands under her scarf. We gathered one by 
one, a few admirers of those melodies—a postman with his 
mailbag, a little boy, a maidservant, a couple of dock workers. 
The elegant carriages rolled noisily by; the carts and wagons 
drowned out the melodies, which emerged fragmentarily for 
a moment. You two unfortunate artists, do you know that 
those strains hide in themselves the glories of the whole 
world? —Was it not like a rendezvous?-— 


In a theater, it happened that a fire started offstage. The 
clown came out to tell the audience. They thought it was a 
joke and applauded. He told them again, and they became still 
more hilarious. This is the way, I suppose, that the world will 
be destroyed—amid the universal hilarity of wits and wags 
who think it is all a joke. 


Diapsalmata 31 


What, if anything, is the meaning of this life? If people are 
divided into two great classes, it may be said that one class 
works for a living and the other does not have that need. But 
to work for a living certainly cannot be the meaning of life, 
since it is indeed a contradiction that the continual production 
of the conditions is supposed to be the answer to the question 
of the meaning of that which is conditional upon their produc- 
tion. The lives of the rest of them generally have no meaning 
except to consume the conditions. To say that the meaning of 
life is to die seems to be a contradiction also. 


Real enjoyment consists not in what one enjoys but in the 
idea. If I had in my service a submissive jinni who, when I] 
asked for a glass of water, would bring me the world’s most 
expensive wines, deliciously blended, in a goblet, I would dis- 
miss him until he learned that the enjoyment consists not in 
what I enjoy but in getting my own way. 


So I am not the one who is the lord of my life; Iam one of 
the threads to be spun into the calico of life! Well, then, even 
though I cannot spin, I can still cut the thread. 


All will be acquired in stillness and made divine in silence. It 
is true not only of Psyche’s expected child that its future de- 
pends on her silence. 


Mit einem Kind, das géttlich, wenn Du schweigst— 
Doch menschlich, wenn Du das Geheimniss zeigst 
[With child, divine, if you are silent— 

But human, if you disclose the secret]. 


741 seem destined to have to suffer through” all possible 
moods, to be required to have experiences of all kinds. At 
every moment I lie out in the middle of the ocean like a child 
who is supposed to learn to swim. I scream (this I have learned 
from the Greeks, from whom one can learn the purely hu- 
man). Admittedly, I have a swimming belt around my waist, 


32 Either/Or, I 


but I do not see the support that is supposed to hold me up. It 
is an appalling way to gain experience. 


It is quite striking that the two most appalling contrasts pro- 
vide a conception of eternity. If I picture that unfortunate 
bookkeeper who went mad in his despair over having ruined 
a business firm by stating in the account book that seven and 
six are fourteen—if I picture him, indifferent to everything 
else, repeating to himself day in and day out, “Seven and six 
are fourteen,” I have a symbol of eternity. If I imagine a lush 
harem beauty, reclining on a couch in all her charm and un- 
concerned about anything in the world, then I have again a 
symbol for eternity. 


7*&gt;What philosophers say about actuality [Virkelighed] is 
often just as disappointing” as it is when one reads on a sign in 
a secondhand shop: Pressing Done Here. If a person were to 
bring his clothes to be pressed, he would be duped, for the sign 
is merely for sale. 


For me nothing is more dangerous than to recollect [erin- 
dre].”” As soon as I have recollected a life relationship, that 
relationship has ceased to exist. It is said that absence makes 
the heart grow fonder. That is very true, but it becomes fonder 
in a purely poetic way. To live in recollection is the most per- 
fect life imaginable; recollection is more richly satisfying than 
all actuality, and it has a security that no actuality possesses. A 
recollected life relationship has already passed into eternity 
and has no temporal interest anymore. 


S°If anyone should keep a diary, I am the one, in order to re- 
fresh my memory [Hukommelse]*! a bit. It frequently happens 
that with the passage of time I have completely forgotten the 
reasons that moved me to this or that, with regard not only to 
trivialities but also to the most crucial steps. If the reason oc- 
curs to me, it can sometimes be so strange that I cannot even 
believe that it was the reason. This doubt would be removed 
if I had something written to refer to. On the whole, a reason 
is a curious thing. If] regard it with all my passion, it develops 


Diapsalmata 33 


into an enormous necessity that can set heaven and earth in 
motion; if] am devoid of passion, I look down on it derisively. 
—For some time now, I have been speculating about what 
really was the reason that moved me to resign as a school- 
teacher. When I think about it now, it seems to me that such 
an appointment was just the thing for me. Today it dawned on 
me that the reason was precisely this—that I had to consider 
myself completely qualified for this post. If I had continued in 
my job, I would have had everything to lose, nothing to gain. 
For that reason, I considered it proper to resign my post and 
seck employment with a traveling theater company, because | 
had no talent and consequently had everything to gain. 


It takes a lot of naiveté to believe that it helps to shout and 
scream in the world, as if one’s fate would thereby be altered. 
Take what comes and avoid all complications. In my early 
years, when I went to a restaurant, I would say to the waiter: 
A good cut, a very good cut, from the loin, and not too fat. 
Perhaps the waiter would scarcely hear what I said. Perhaps it 
was even less likely that he would heed it, and still less that my 
voice would penetrate into the kitchen, influence the chef— 
and even if all this happened, there perhaps was not a good cut 
in the whole roast. Now I never shout anymore. 


Social endeavors and the associated beautiful sympathy be- 
come more and more widespread. In Leipzig, a committee 
formed out of sympathy for the sad fate of old horses has de- 
cided to eat them. 


82] have only one friend, and that is echo. Why is it my 
friend? Because I love my sorrow, and echo does not take it 
away from me. I have only one confidant, and that is the si- 
lence of night. Why is it my confidant? Because it remains si- 
lent. 


83The same thing happened to me that, according to legend, 
happened to Parmeniscus, who in the Trophonean cave lost 
the ability to laugh but acquired it again on the island of Delos 


34 Either/Or, I 


upon seeing a shapeless block that was said to be the image of 
the goddess Leto.** When I was very young, I forgot in the 
Trophonean cave how to laugh; when I became an adult, 
when I opened my eyes and saw actuality, then I started to 
laugh and have never stopped laughing since that time. I saw 
that the meaning of life was to make a living, its goal to be- 
come a councilor, that the rich delight of love was to acquire a 
well-to-do girl, that the blessedness of friendship was to help 
each other in financial difficulties, that wisdom was whatever 
the majority assumed it to be, that enthusiasm was to give a 
speech, that courage was to risk being fined ten dollars, that 
cordiality was to say “May it do you good””® after a meal, that 
piety was to go to communion once a year.*° This I saw, and I 
laughed. 


87What is it that binds me? From what was the chain formed 
that bound the Fenris wolf2** It was made of the noise of cats’ 
paws walking on the ground, of the beards of women, of the 
roots of cliffs, of the grass of bears, of the breath of fish, and 
of the spittle of birds. I, too, am bound in the same way by a 
chain formed of gloomy fancies, of alarming dreams, of trou- 
bled thoughts, of fearful presentiments, of inexplicable anxie- 
ties. This chain is ‘“‘very flexible, soft as silk, yields to the most 
powerful strain, and cannot be torn apart.’ 


Strangely enough, it is always the same thing that preoccu- 
pies a person throughout all the ages of life, and one always 
goes just so far, or, rather, one goes backwards. In grammar 
school, when I was fifteen years old, I wrote very suavely on 
demonstrations for the existence of God and the immortality 
of the soul, on the concept of faith, and on the meaning of mir- 
acles. For my examen artium [student examination], I wrote a 
composition on the immortality of the soul, for which I was 
awarded pre ceteris [distinction or first honors];*! later I won 
the prize for a composition on this subject. Who would believe 
that in my twenty-fifth year, after such a solid and very prom- 
ising beginning, I would have come to the point of not being 
able to present a single demonstration for the immortality of 


Diapsalmata 35 


the soul. From my school days, I especially recall that a com- 
position of mine on the immortality of the soul was extrava- 
gantly praised and read aloud by the teacher because of the ex- 
cellence of language as well as of content. Alas, alas, alas! I 
threw away this composition long ago. How unfortunate! My 
doubting soul perhaps would have been captivated by it, by 
the language as well as by the content. So this is my advice to 
parents, superiors, and teachers—that they urge the children in 
their charge to keep the Danish compositions written in the 
fifteenth year. To give this advice is the only thing I can do for 
the benefit of the human race. 


To a knowledge of the truth, I perhaps have come; to sal- 
vation, surely not.?&gt; What shall I do? Be active in the world, 
people say. Should I then communicate my sorrow to the 
world, make one more contribution to prove how pitiable and 
wretched everything is, perhaps discover a new, hitherto un- 
detected stain [Plet] in human life? I could then reap the rare 
reward of becoming famous, just like the man who discovered 
the spots [Pletter] on Jupiter. | still prefer to remain silent. 


*&gt;How much the same human nature is! With what innate 
genius a little child can often show us a vivid picture of the 
larger scale. I was really amused today by little Ludvig. He sat 
in his tiny chair and looked around with visible delight. Then 
the nursemaid, Maren, walked through the room. “Maren!” 
he shouted. ‘Yes, little Ludvig,” she answered with her cus- 
tomary friendliness and came over to him. He tilted his big 
head to one side a bit, fastened his enormous eyes on her with 
a certain roguishness and then said quite phlegmatically, “Not 
this Maren; it was another Maren.”’ What do we adults do? We 
shout to the whole world, and when it approaches us in a 
friendly manner we say, “It was not this Maren.” 


My life is like an eternal night; when I die, I shall be able to 
say with Achilles: 


36 Either/Or, I 


Dau bist vollbracht, Nachtwache meines Daseyns 
[You are fulfilled, nightwatch of my life].% 


My life is utterly meaningless. When I consider its various 
epochs, my life is like the word Schnur in the dictionary, which 
first of all means a string, and second a daughter-in-law. All 
that is lacking is that in the third place the word Schnur means 
a camel, in the fourth a whisk broom. 


*7T am just like the Lineburger swine. My thinking is a pas- 
sion. I am expert at rooting up truffles for others; I find no 
pleasure in them myself. I take the problems on my nose, but 
Ican do no more with them than to throw them back over my 


head. 


In vain do I resist. My foot slips. My life nevertheless re- 
mains a poet-existence. Can anything worse be imagined? I 
am predestined; fate laughs at me when it suddenly shows me 
how everything I do to resist becomes a factor in such an ex- 
istence [Tilverelse]. I can describe hope so vividly that every 
hoping individual will recognize my description as his own; 
and yet it is forgery, for even as I am describing it I am think- 
ing of recollection [Erindring].” 


100But there is yet another demonstration of the existence of 
God that has hitherto been overlooked. It is introduced by a 
servant in Aristophanes’ The Knights, 32-35 (Demosthenes 
and Nicias conversing): 


Anpoobevys. 
motov 6eétas; Etedv Hyet yao Heovc; 
Nixtas. 
EYWYE. 
Anpoobevys. 
MOLM YOMPEVOS TEXLNOLW; 
Nexias. 
OTL BEoiat ExOQOc Ely: OVX ELXOTWWC; 
‘Anuoobévyc. 
35. eb meoo066éCets Le. 


Diapsalmata 37 


[DE.  Stat-at-ues is it? What, do you really think 
That there are gods? 

NIC. I know it. 

DE. Know it! How? 

NIC. I’msuch a wretched god-detested chap. 

DE. Well urged indeed].'* 


‘How dreadful boredom is—how dreadfully boring; I 
know no stronger expression, no truer one, for like is recog- 
nized only by like. Would that there were a loftier, stronger 
expression, for then there would still be one movement. I lie 
prostrate, inert; the only thing I see is emptiness, the only 
thing I live on is emptiness, the only thing I move in 1s emp- 
tiness. I do not even suffer pain. The vulture pecked contin- 
ually at Prometheus’s liver;!® the poison dripped down con- 
tinually on Loki;' it was at least an interruption, even though 
monotonous. Pain itself has lost its refreshment for me. If I 
were offered all the glories of the world or all the torments of 
the world, one would move me no more than the other; I 
would not turn over to the other side either to attain or to 
avoid. I am dying death.!°° And what could divert me? Well, 
if I managed to see a faithfulness that withstood every ordeal 
[Provelse], an enthusiasm that endured everything, a faith that 
moved mountains;! if I were to become aware of an idea that 
joined the finite and the infinite. But my soul’s poisonous 
doubt consumes everything. My soul is like the Dead Sea, 
over which no bird is able to fly; when it has come midway, it 
sinks down, exhausted, to death and destruction. 


107How strange! With what equivocal anxiety about losing 
and keeping, people nevertheless cling to this life. At times I 
have considered taking a decisive step compared with which 
all previous ones were but child’s play—to set out on the great 
voyage of discovery. As a ship is saluted with a cannonade 
when it is launched, so I would salute myself: And yet. Is it 
courage that I lack? If a stone fell down and killed me, that 
would still be a way out. 


23 


38 Either/Or, I 


108Tautology is and remains the highest principle, the high- 
est maxim of thought.'®? No wonder, then, that most people 
use it. It is not so impoverished, either, and can well fill out a 
whole life. It has a jesting, witty, entertaining form; this is [the 
category of] infinite judgments.!'© This kind of tautology is 
the paradoxical and transcendental kind. It has the serious, sci- 
entific, and edifying form. The formula is as follows: when 
two quantities are equal in size to one and the same third quan- 
tity, they are all of equal size.''! This is a quantitative conclu- 
sion. This kind of tautology is especially useful on podiums 
and in pulpits, where one must say much. 


'2'The disproportion of my body is that my forelegs are too 
short. Like the hare from New Holland,'!3 I have very short 
forelegs but extremely long hind legs. Ordinarily, I sit very 
still; if 1 make a move, it is a tremendous leap, to the horror of 
all those to whom I am bound by the tender ties of kinship and 
friendship. 


Either/Or'"4 
An Ecstatic Discourse 


Marry, and you will regret it. Do not marry, and you will also 
regret it. Marry or do not marry, you will regret it either 
way.'!° Whether you marry or you do not marry, you will re- 
gret it either way. Laugh at the stupidities of the world, and 
you will regret it; weep over them, and you will also regret it. 
Laugh at the stupidities of the world or weep over them, you 
will regret it either way. Whether you laugh at the stupidities 
of the world or you weep over them, you will regret it either 
way. Trust a girl, and you will regret it. Do not trust her, and 
you will also regret it. Trust a girl or do not trust her, you will 
regret it either way. Whether you trust a girl or do not trust 
her, you will regret it either way. Hang yourself, and you will 
regret it. Do not hang yourself, and you will also regret it. 
Hang yourself or do not hang yourself, you will regret it either 
way. Whether you hang yourself or do not hang yourself, you 


Diapsalmata 39 


will regret it either way. This, gentlemen, is the quintessence 
of all the wisdom of life. It is not merely in isolated moments 
that I, as Spinoza says, view everything aeterno modo [in the 
mode of eternity],''° but Iam continually aeterno modo. Many 
believe they, too, are this when after doing one thing or an- 
other they unite or mediate these opposites. But this is a mis- 
understanding, for the true eternity does not lie behind either/ 
or but before it. Their eternity will therefore also be a painful 
temporal sequence, since they will have a double regret on 
which to live. My wisdom is easy to grasp, for I have only one 
maxim, and even that is not a point of departure for me. One 
must differentiate between the subsequent dialectic in either/ 
or and the eternal one suggested here. So when I say that my 
maxim is not a point of departure for me, this does not have 
the opposite of being a point of departure but is merely the 
negative expression of my maxim, that by which it compre- 
hends itself in contrast to being a point of departure or not 
being a point of departure. My maxim is not a point of depar- 
ture for me, because if I made it a point of departure, I would 
regret it, and if I did not make it a point of departure, I would 
also regret it. If one or another of my esteemed listeners thinks 
there is anything to what I have said, he merely demonstrates 
that he has no head for philosophy. If he thinks there is any 
movement in what has been said, this demonstrates the same 
thing. But for those listeners who are able to follow me, al- 
though I do not move, I shall now elucidate the eternal truth 
by which this philosophy is self-contained and does not con- 
cede anything higher. That is, if 1 made my maxim a point of 
departure, then I would be unable to stop, for if did not stop, 
I would regret it, and if I did stop, I would also regret it, etc. 
But if I never start, then I can always stop, for my eternal 
starting is my eternal stopping. Experience shows that it is not 
at all difficult for philosophy to begin. Far from it. It begins, 
in fact, with nothing!” and therefore can always begin. But it 
is always difficult for philosophy and philosophers to stop. 
This difficulty, too, I have avoided, for if anyone thinks that I, 
in stopping now, actually stop, he demonstrates that he does 
not have speculative comprehension. The point is that I do not 


24 


40 Either/Or, I 


stop now, but I stopped when I began. My philosophy, there- 
fore, has the advantageous characteristic of being brief and of 
being irrefutable, for if anyone disputes me, I daresay I have 
the right to declare him mad. The philosopher, then, is contin- 
ually aeterno modo and does not have, as did the blessed Sin- 
tenis, only specific hours that are lived for eternity. "8 


"Why was I not born in Nyboder,!° why did I not die as a 
baby? Then my father would himself have laid me in a little 
casket, taken me under his arm, carried me out to the grave on 
a Sunday morning, would himself have cast the earth on it and 
in a low voice said a few words understandable only to him- 
self. Only in the happy days of yore could people have the idea 
of babies weeping in Elysium because they died so prema- 
turely.!?! 


I have never been joyful, and yet it has always seemed as if 
Joy were my constant companion, as if the buoyant jinn of joy 
danced around me, invisible to others but not to me, whose 
eyes shone with delight. Then when I walk past people, 
happy-go-lucky as a god, and they envy me because of my 
good fortune, I laugh, for I despise people, and I take my re- 
venge. I have never wished to do anyone an injustice, but I 
have always made it appear as if anyone who came close to me 
would be wronged and injured. Then when I hear others 
praised for their faithfulness, their integrity, I laugh, for I de- 
spise people, and I take my revenge. My heart has never been 
hardened toward anyone, but I have always made it appear, es- 
pecially when I was touched most deeply, as if my heart were 
closed and alien to every feeling. Then when I hear others 
lauded for their good hearts, see them loved for their deep, 
rich feelings, then I laugh, for I despise people and take my re- 
venge. When I see myself cursed, abhorred, hated for my 
coldness and heartlessness, then I laugh, then my rage is satis- 
fied. The point is that if the good people could make me be ac- 
tually in the wrong, make me actually do an injustice—well, 
then I would have lost. 


Diapsalmata 41 


23My misfortune is this: an angel of death always walks at 
my side, and it is not the doors of the chosen ones that I sprin- 
kle with blood as a sign that he is to pass by!?4—no, it is pre- 
cisely their doors that he enters—for only recollection’s love is 


happy. 


Wine no longer cheers my heart; a little of it makes me sad— 
much, depressed. My soul is dull and slack; in vain do I jab the 
spur of desire into its side; it is exhausted, it can no longer raise 
itself up in its royal jump. I have lost all my illusions. In vain 
do I seek to abandon myself in joy’s infinitude; it cannot lift 
me, or, rather, I cannot lift myself. Previously, when it merely 
beckoned, I mounted, light, hearty, and cheerful. When I rode 
slowly through the forest, it seemed as if I were flying. Now, 
when the horse is covered with lather and is almost ready to 
drop, it seems to me that I do not move from the spot. Iam 
alone, as I have always been—forsaken not by men, that 
would not pain me, but by the happy jinn of joy, who trooped 
around me in great numbers, who met acquaintances every- 
where, showed me an opportunity everywhere. Just as an in- 
toxicated man collects a wanton throng of young people 
around him, so they flocked about me, the elves of joy, and 
my smile was meant for them. My soul has lost possibility. If 
I were to wish for something, I would wish not for wealth or 
power but for the passion of possibility, for the eye, eternally 
young, eternally ardent, that sees possibility everywhere. 
Pleasure disappoints; possibility does not. And what wine is so 
sparkling, so fragrant, so intoxicating! 


Where the rays of the sun do not reach, the tones still man- 
age to come. My apartment is dark and gloomy; a high wall 
practically keeps out the light of day. It must be in the next 
courtyard, very likely a wandering musician. What instru- 
ment is it? A reed pipe?..... What do I hear—the minuet 
from Don Giovanni. Carry me away, then, you rich, strong 
tones, to the ring of girls, to the delight of the dance. —The 
pharmacist pounds his mortar, the maid scrubs her kettle, the 
groom curries his horse and knocks the currycomb on the cob- 


27 


42 Either/Or, I 


blestones.!?5 These tones are only for me; only to me do they 
beckon. Oh, thank you, whoever you are! Thank you! My 
soul is so rich, so hearty, so intoxicated with joy! 


Salmon is in itself very delicious eating, but too much of it 
is bad for the health, inasmuch as it is a heavy food. For this 
reason, once when there was a great catch of salmon, the po- 
lice in Hamburg ordered each master of a household to give his 
servants salmon not more than once a week. Would that there 
might be a similar police notice with regard to sentimentality. 


126My sorrow is my baronial castle, which lies like an eagle’s 
nest high up on the mountain peak among the clouds. No one 
can take it by storm. From it I swoop down into actuality and 
snatch my prey, but I do not stay down there. I bring my 
booty home, and this booty is a picture I weave into the tap- 
estries at my castle. Then I live as one already dead. Every- 
thing I have experienced I immerse in a baptism of oblivion 
unto an eternity of recollection. Everything temporal and for- 
tuitous is forgotten and blotted out. Then I sit like an old gray- 
haired man, pensive, and explain the pictures in a soft voice, 
almost whispering, and beside me sits a child, listening, al- 
though he remembers everything before I tell it. 


The sun is shining brilliantly and beautifully into my room; 
the window in the next room is open. Everything is quiet out 
on the street. It is Sunday afternoon. | distinctly hear a lark 
warbling outside a window in one of the neighboring court- 
yards, outside the window where the pretty girl lives. Far 
away in a distant street, I hear a man crying “Shrimp for 
sale.” The air is so warm, and yet the whole city is as if de- 
serted, —Then I call to mind my youth and my first love— 
when I was filled with longing; now I long only for my first 
longing. What is youth? A dream. What is love? The content 
of the dream. 


Something marvelous has happened to me. I was trans- 
ported to the seventh heaven. There sat all the gods assembled. 


Diapsalmata 43 


As a special dispensation, I was granted the favor of making a 
wish. ‘“What do you want,” asked Mercury. ‘““Do you want 
youth, or beauty, or power, or a long life, or the most beau- 
tiful girl, or any one of the other glorious things we have in the 
treasure chest? Choose—but only one thing.” For a moment I 
was bewildered; then I addressed the gods, saying: My es- 
teemed contemporaries, I choose one thing—that I may al- 
ways have the laughter on my side. Not one of the gods said a 
word; instead, all of them began to laugh. From that I con- 
cluded that my wish was granted and decided that the gods 
knew how to express themselves with good taste, for it would 
indeed have been inappropriate to reply solemnly: It is granted 
to you. !?7 


THE IMMEDIATE EROTIC STAGES? 
OR 
THE MUSICAL-EROTIC 


INSIGNIFICANT INTRODUCTION 


From the moment my soul was first astounded by Mozart’s 
music and humbly bowed in admiration, it has often been a fa- 
vorite and refreshing occupation for me to deliberate on the 
way that happy Greek view of the world that calls the world a 
x0aL0¢ [cosmos] because it manifests itself as a well-organized 
whole, as an elegant, transparent adornment for the spirit that 
acts upon and operates throughout it, the way that happy view 
lets itself be repeated in a higher order of things, in the world 
of ideals, the way there is here again a ruling wisdom espe- 
cially wonderful at uniting what belongs together, Axel with 
Valborg,? Homer with the Trojan War, Raphael with Cathol- 
icism, Mozart with Don Juan. There is a paltry disbelief that 
seems to contain considerable healing power.? It thinks that 
such a connection is accidental and sees nothing more in it than 
a very fortunate conjunction of the various forces in the game 
of life. It thinks that it is accidental that the lovers find each 
other, accidental that they love each other. There might have 
been a hundred other girls with whom he could have been just 
as happy, whom he could have loved just as much. It considers 
that many a poet has lived who would have been just as im- 
mortal as Homer if that glorious subject matter had not been 
taken over by him, many a composer who would have been 
just as immortal as Mozart if the opportunity had offered it- 
self. This wisdom contains considerable consolation and balm 
for all mediocrities, who thereby see themselves in a position 
to delude themselves and like-minded people into thinking 
that they did not become as exceptional as the exceptional ones 
because of a mistaken identification on the part of fate, a mis- 
take on the part of the world. This produces a very convenient 
optimism. But it is abhorrent, of course, to every high- 


314 


32 


33 


48 Either/Or, I 


minded soul, every optimate,* to whom it is not as important 
to rescue himself in such a paltry manner as it is to lose himself 
by contemplating greatness; whereas it is a delight to his soul, 
a sacred joy, to see united that which belongs together. This is 
good fortune, not in the sense of the accidental, and thus pre- 
supposes two factors, whereas the accidental consists in the 
unarticulated interjections of fate. This is good fortune in his- 
tory, the divine interplay of the historic forces, the festival pe- 
riod of the historic epoch. The accidental has only one factor: 
It is accidental that Homer, in the history of the Trojan War, 
acquired the most remarkable epic subject matter imaginable. 
Good fortune has two factors: It is fortunate that this most re- 
markable epic subject matter came into the hands of Homer. 
Here the emphasis is just as much on Homer as on the subject 
matter. Here is the deep harmony that pervades every produc- 
tion we call classic. So also with Mozart: It is fortunate that the 
perhaps sole musical theme (in the more profound sense) was 
given to—Mozart. 

With his Don Giovanni,&gt; Mozart joins that little immortal 
band of men whose names, whose works, time will not forget 
because eternity recollects them. And although it makes no 
difference, once one is in, whether one ranks highest or low- 
est—because in a certain sense everyone ranks equally high— 
since all rank infinitely high, and although it is just as childish 
to argue about first and last places here as it is to argue about 
the place assigned in church on confirmation day, I am still too 
much of a child, or, more correctly, I am infatuated, like a 
young girl, with Mozart, and I must have him rank in first 
place, whatever it costs. And I will go to the deacon and the 
pastor and the dean and the bishop and the whole church coun- 
cil, and I will beseech and implore them to grant my request, 
and I will challenge the whole congregation on the same mat- 
ter, and if my appeal is not heard, my childish wish not ful- 
filled, then I will secede from the association, then I will di- 
vorce myself from its way of thinking, then I will form a sect 
that not only places Mozart first but has no one but Mozart. 
And I will beseech Mozart to forgive me that his music did not 
inspire me to great deeds but made me a fool who, because of 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 49 


him, lost the little sense I had and now in quiet sadness usually 
passes the time humming something I do not understand, and 
like a ghost prowls night and day around something I cannot 
enter. “Immortal Mozart! You to whom I owe everything—to 
whom I owe that I lost my mind, that my soul was astounded, 
that I was terrified at the core of my being—you to whom I 
owe that I did not go through life without encountering some- 
thing that could shake me, you whom I thank because I did not 
die without having loved, even though my love was unhappy. 
No wonder, then, that Iam much more zealous for his glori- 
fication than for the happiest moment of my own life, much 
more zealous for his immortality than for my own existence 
[ Tilver]. Indeed, if he were taken away, if his name were blot- 
ted out, that would demolish the one pillar that until now has 
prevented everything from collapsing for me into a boundless 
chaos, into a dreadful nothing. 

Yet I certainly need not fear that any age will deny him a 
place in that kingdom of the gods, but I do need to be prepared 
for people to find it childish of me to insist that he have first 
place. And although I by no means propose to feel ashamed of 
my childishness, although it will always have more signifi- 
cance and value for me than any exhaustive consideration pre- 
cisely because it is inexhaustible, I shall nevertheless try by 
way of deliberation to demonstrate his legitimate claim. 

Ina classic work, good fortune—that which makes it classic 
and immortal—is the absolute correlation of the two forces. 
This correlation is so absolute that a subsequent reflective age 
will scarcely be able, even in thought, to separate that which is 
so intrinsically conjoined without running the danger of caus- 
ing or fostering a misunderstanding. For example, if it is said 
that it was Homer’s good fortune that he acquired that most 
exceptional epic subject matter, this can lead one to forget that 
we always have this epic subject matter through Homer’s con- 
ception, and the fact that it appears to be the most perfect epic 
subject matter is clear to us only in and through the transub- 
stantiation due to Homer. If, however, Homer’s poetic work 
in permeating the subject matter is emphasized, then one runs 
the risk of forgetting that the poem would never have become 


34 


50 Either/Or, I 


what it is if the idea with which Homer permeated it was not 
its own idea, if the form was not the subject matter’s own 
form. The poet wishes for his subject matter, but, as they say, 
wishing is no art; this is quite correct and truthfully applies to 
a host of powerless poetic wishes. To wish properly, however, 
is a great art, or, more correctly, it is a gift. It is the inexplica- 
bility and mysteriousness of genius, just as with a divining rod 
[Onskeqvist], which never has the notion to wish [enske] except 
in the presence of that for which it wishes. Hence, wishing has 
a far deeper significance than it ordinarily does; indeed, to ab- 
stract reason it appears ludicrous, since it rather thinks of 
wishing in connection with what is not present, not in connec- 
tion with what is present. 

There was a school of estheticians who, because of a one- 
sided emphasis on the significance of form, were not without 
guilt in occasioning the diametrically opposite misunderstand- 
ing.” It has often struck me that these estheticians were as a 
matter of course attached to Hegelian philosophy, inasmuch as 
both a general knowledge of Hegel and a special knowledge of 
his esthetics give assurance that he strongly emphasizes, espe- 
cially with regard to the esthetic, the importance of the subject 
matter.® Both parts, however, essentially belong together, and 
a single observation will be sufficient to show this, since other- 
wise a phenomenon of this sort would be inexplicable. Ordi- 
narily, it is a single work or a single suite of works that marks 
the particular individual as a classic poet, artist, etc. The same 
individuality may have produced many different things, but 
they are not to be compared with it. For example, Homer also 
wrote a Batrachomyomachia? but did not become a classic writer 
or immortal through it. To say that this is due to the unim- 
portance of the theme is indeed foolish, since the classic con- 
sists in the balance. Now, if whatever makes a classic work 
classic lies simply and solely in the producing individual, then 
everything he produced would inevitably be classic, some- 
what in the sense, although higher, in which bees always pro- 
duce a certain kind of cell. To answer that it was due to his hav- 
ing been more fortunate with the one than with the other 
would really say nothing. For one thing, this is merely a splen- 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 51 


did tautology that all too frequently in life enjoys the honor of 
being regarded as an answer; for another, as an answer it per- 
tains to a relativity other than that of the question. It throws 
no light on the relation between subject matter and form and 
at best could come under consideration if the question per- 
tained solely to the formative activity. 

It is likewise the case with Mozart that only one of his works 
makes him a classic composer and absolutely immortal. That 
work is Don Giovanni. Everything else he has composed can 
please and delight, arouse our admiration, enrich the soul, sat- 
isfy the ear, delight the heart; but no service is done to him and 
his immortality by throwing everything together and making 
it all equally great. Don Giovanni is his reception piece.'!° With 
Don Giovanni, he enters that eternity which lies not outside 
time but in the midst of it, which is not hidden from the eyes 
of men by any curtain, into which the immortals are not ad- 
mitted once and for all but are continually being admitted, in- 
asmuch as the generation passes by and directs its gaze toward 
them, is happy in its contemplation of them, goes to its grave, 
and the next generation in turn goes by and is transfigured in 
contemplating them. With his Don Giovanni, Mozart enters 
the rank of those immortals, of those visibly transfigured 
ones, whom no cloud takes away"! from the eyes of men; with 
Don Giovanni he stands supreme among them. This last asser- 
tion, as I said above, I shall attempt to demonstrate. 

All classic productions rank equally high, as previously 
noted, because each one ranks infinitely high. Consequently, 
if one nevertheless wants to introduce a certain order into this 
series, it stands to reason that it cannot be based on anything 
essential, for that would mean that there was an essential dif- 
ference, and that in turn would mean that the word “‘classic”’ 
was wrongly predicated of all of them. Ifa classification were 
based on the dissimilar nature of the subject matter, one would 
immediately be involved in a misunderstanding, which in its 
wider extension would end with the annulment of the whole 
concept of the classic. The subject matter is an essential ele- 
ment, inasmuch as it is one factor, but it is not the absolute, 
since it is only one element. It could be pointed out that in a 


35 


36 


52 Either/Or, I 


sense certain kinds of classic works have no subject matter, 
whereas in others, however, the subject matter plays a very 
important role. The former is the case with works we admire 
as classic in architecture, sculpture, music, painting—espe- 
cially the first three, and even in painting, insofar as there is 
any question of subject matter it has importance almost solely 
as an occasion. The second is true of poetry, this word under- 
stood in its widest meaning to denote all artistic production 
that is based on language and the historical consciousness. This 
comment is in itself altogether correct, but it is a mistake to 
base a classification on it by regarding the absence or presence 
of subject matter as an advantage or a detriment to the creative 
individual. If it is strictly understood, the result will be to ar- 
gue the very opposite of what was really intended, as is always 
the case when one moves abstractly in dialectical qualifica- 
tions, where it is the case that one not only says one thing and 
means something else but says something else; what one 
thinks one is saying one does not say but says the opposite. So 
it is when the subject matter is made the principle of division. 
In speaking of it, one speaks of something entirely different: 
namely, the formative activity. 

But the same thing happens if one starts with the formative 
activity and emphasizes it alone. In maintaining the distinction 
here and emphasizing that in some respects the formative ac- 
tivity is creative to the degree that it creates the subject matter 
in the process, whereas in other respects it receives the subject 
matter, then here again, although one thinks one is speaking of 
the formative activity, one is actually speaking of the subject 
matter and is basing the classification on the division of the 
subject matter. 

The same holds for the formative activity as the point of de- 
parture in such a classification as for the subject matter. Con- 
sequently, a single aspect cannot be used as the basis for an or- 
der of rank, because it is still too essential to be sufficiently 
accidental, too accidental to be a basis for an essential ranking. 
But this thoroughgoing mutual permeation—which justifies 
saying, if one wishes to speak clearly, that the subject matter 
permeates the form and also that the form permeates the sub- 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 53 


ject matter—this mutual permeation, this like-for-like in the 
immortal friendship of the classic, may serve to illuminate the 
classic from a new side and to limit it in such a way that it does 
not become too copious. In fact, the estheticians who one-sid- 
edly stressed the poetic activity have broadened this concept so 
much that this pantheon became adorned, indeed, overdecor- 
ated, to such a degree with classic knickknacks and bagatelles 
that the unsophisticated notion of a cool hall with a few partic- 
ular great figures utterly vanished, and instead that pantheon 
became a storage attic. According to this esthetic view, every 
artistically skillful little dainty is a classic work that is assured 
of absolute immortality; indeed, in this kind of hocus-pocus, 
such trifles are admitted first of all. Although paradoxes are 
otherwise detested, the paradox that the least was actually art 
was not dismaying. The untruth was in a one-sided emphasis 
on the formal activity. Therefore, such an esthetic view could 
last only for a certain period, that is, so long as there was no 
awareness that time mocked it and its classic works. In the 
realm of esthetics, this view was a form of the radicalism that 
has similarly manifested itself in so many spheres; it was an 
expression of the unbridled producing individual in his equally 
unbridled lack of substance. 

Like so many others, however, this effort found its subduer 
in Hegel. It is a sad truth about Hegelian philosophy that on 
the whole it has by no means achieved the importance, neither 
for the past nor for the present age, that it would have achieved 
if the past age had not been so busy scaring people into it but 
had rather possessed a little more calm presence of mind in ap~ 
propriating it to itself, and if the present age had not been so 
indefatigably active in driving people beyond it.'? Hegel rein- 
stated the subject matter, the idea, in its rights and thereby 
ousted those transient classic works, those superficialities, 
those twilight moths from the arched vaults of classicism. It is 
by no means our intention to deny these works the value that 
is their due, but the point is to watch out lest here, as in so 
many other places, the language become confused, the con- 
cepts enervated. A certain eternity may be readily attributed to 
them, and this is their merit, but still this eternity is actually 


38 


54 Either/Or, I 


only the eternal moment that any true artistic production has, 
but not the full eternity in the midst of the shifts and changes 
of the times. What these productions lacked was ideas, and the 
more formally perfect they were, the more quickly they 
burned themselves out. As technical skill was more and more 
developed to the highest level of virtuosity, the more transient 
this virtuosity became and the more it lacked the mettle and 
power or balance to withstand the gusts of time, while more 
and more exalted it continually made greater claims to being 
the most distilled spirit. Only where the idea is brought to rest 
and transparency in a definite form can there be any question 
of a classic work, but then it will also be capable of withstand- 
ing the times. This unity, this mutual intimacy in each other, 
every classic work has, and thus it is readily perceived that 
every attempt at a classification of the various classic works 
that has as its point of departure a separation of subject matter 
and form or of idea and form is eo ipso a failure. 

Another way might be proposed. The medium through 
which the idea becomes visible could be made the object of 
consideration. Having noted that one medium is richer and an- 
other less rich, one could base the division on this difference by 
finding a facilitation or an impediment in the varying richness 
or poverty of the medium. But the medium stands in an all too 
necessary relation to the whole production to keep a division 
based on it from becoming entangled in the above-mentioned 
difficulties after a few turns of thought. 

I believe, however, that the following observations will 
open the prospect for a division that will have validity pre- 
cisely because it is completely accidental. The more abstract 
and thus the more impoverished the idea is, the more abstract 
and thus the more impoverished the medium is; hence the 
greater is the probability that no repetition can be imagined, 
and the greater is the probability that when the idea has ac- 
quired its expression it has acquired it once and for all. On the 
other hand, the more concrete and thus the richer the idea and 
likewise the medium, the greater is the probability of a repe- 
tition. As I now place the various classic works side by side 
and, without wishing to rank them, am amazed that all stand 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 55 


equally high, it nevertheless will be readily apparent that one 
section has more works than another or, if it does not, that 
there is the possibility that it can have, whereas any possibility 
for the other is not so readily apparent. 

I would like to develop this point in somewhat more detail. 
The more abstract the idea is, the less the probability. But how 
does the idea become concrete? By being permeated by the 
historical. The more concrete the idea, the greater the proba- 
bility. The more abstract the medium is, the less the probabil- 
ity; the more concrete, the more. But what does it mean that 
the medium is concrete except that it either is, or is seen in its 
approximation to, language, for language is the most concrete 
of all media. Hence, the idea that is disclosed in sculpture is to- 
tally abstract and has no relation to the historical; the medium 
through which it becomes manifest is likewise abstract. Con- 
sequently, it is very probable that the section of classic works 
that comprises sculpture will include only a few. The witness 
of time and the agreement of experience bear me out on this. 
But if I take a concrete idea and a concrete medium, the situa- 
tion is different. Homer certainly is a classic epic poet, but pre- 
cisely because the idea that becomes manifest in the epic is a 
concrete idea and because the medium is language, it is con- 
ceivable that the section of classic works that includes the epic 
has many works, which are all equally classic because history 
continually provides new epic subject matter. Here, too, the 
witness of history and the agreement of experience bear me 
out. 

If I now base a division on the completely accidental, it 
really cannot be denied that it is accidental. But if reproached 
for it, | then reply that the reproach is a mistake, for it is sup- 
posed to be just that. It is accidental that one section has or can 
have more works than another. But since this is accidental, it 
is easy to see that the class that has or can have the most works 
may very well be placed uppermost. At this point, I could per- 
sist in what I said before and calmly reply that this would be 
perfectly legitimate but that I ought to be all the more praised 
for my consistency because I altogether accidentally placed the 
Opposite section uppermost. But I shall not do that.-On the 


56 Either/Or, I 


other hand, I shall appeal to a circumstance that speaks in my 
favor—namely, the circumstance that the sections that include 
the concrete ideas are not closed and cannot be closed in this 
way. Therefore, it is more natural to place the others first and 
with regard to the latter group always to keep the double 
doors open. But if someone says that this is an imperfection, a 
defect in that first class, then he is plowing outside the furrows 
of my consideration, and I cannot pay any attention to what he 
says, however exhaustive it is, for it is indeed a fixed point 
that, viewed essentially, all are equally perfect. 

But, then, which idea is the most abstract? Here, of course, 
the question concerns an idea that can become a theme for ar- 
tistic treatment, not ideas that are suitable for scholarly-scien- 
tific presentation. Which medium is the most abstract? I will 
answer this question first. It is the medium that is furthest re- 
moved from language. 

Before answering that question, however, may I recall that 
there is a circumstance related to the final solution of my task. 
That is, the most abstract medium does not always have the 
most abstract idea as its theme. Thus the medium that archi- 
tecture uses is undoubtedly the most abstract, and yet the ideas 
that are manifest in architecture are not at all the most abstract. 
Architecture stands in a much closer relation to history than, 
for example, sculpture does. Here again appears the possibility 
of a new choice. For the first class in that order of precedence, 
I can choose either the works with the most abstract medium 
or those with the most abstract idea. In that respect, I prefer 
the idea, not the medium. 

Sculpture, painting, and music have abstract media as does 
architecture, but this is not the place to go further into that ex- 
ploration. The most abstract idea conceivable is the sensuous! 
in its elemental originality [Genialitet].‘* But through which 
medium can it be presented? Only through music. It cannot be 
presented in sculpture because it has a qualification of a kind of 
inwardness; it cannot be painted, for it cannot be caught in def- 
inite contours. In its lyricism, it is a force, a wind, impatience, 
passion, etc., yet in such a way that it exists not in one instant 
but in a succession of instants, for if it existed in one instant, it 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 57 


could be depicted or painted. That it exists in a succession of 
instants expresses its epic character, but still it is not epic in the 
stricter sense, for it has not reached the point of words; it con- 
tinually moves within immediacy. Consequently, it cannot be 
presented in poetry, either. The only medium that can present 
it is music. Music has an element of time in itself but neverthe- 
less does not take place in time except metaphorically. It can- 
not express the historical within time. 

In Mozart’s Don Giovanni, we have the perfect unity of this 
idea and its corresponding form. But precisely because the idea 
is so very abstract and because the medium also is abstract, 
there is no probability that Mozart will ever have a competi- 
tor. Mozart’s good fortune is that he has found a subject matter 
that is intrinsically altogether musical, and if any other com- 
poser were to compete with Mozart, there would be nothing 
for him to do except to compose Don Giovanni all over again. 
Homer found a perfect epic subject matter, but because history 
offers more epic subject matter, many more epic poems are 
conceivable. Such is not the case with Don Giovanni. What I 
really mean will perhaps be seen best if I indicate the difference 
by reference to a related idea. Goethe’s Faust is really a classic 
work, but it is a historical idea, and therefore every extraor- 
dinary time in history will have its Faust. Faust has language as 
its medium, and since this is a much more concrete medium, 
for that reason, too, many works of the same kind are conceiv- 
able. But in the same sense as the classic works of Greek sculp- 
ture, Don Giovanni is and remains the only one of its kind. 
However, since the idea of Don Giovanni is even much more 
abstract than that which constitutes the basis of sculpture, it is 
readily seen that whereas in sculpture there are many works, 
in music there is only a single work. To be sure, many more 
classic works in music are conceivable, but there still is only 
one work of which it can be said that its idea is altogether mu- 
sical in such a way that the music does not help along as ac- 
companiment but discloses its own innermost nature as it dis- 
closes the idea. Therefore Mozart with his Don Giovanni 
stands highest among those immortals. 

But I shall give up this whole exploration. It is written only 


4 


42 


58 Either/Or, I 


for those who have fallen in love. And just as it does not take 
much to make children happy, so it is, as is well known, that 
the love-enraptured often rejoice in very odd things. It is like 
a vehement lovers’ quarrel over nothing, and yet it has its 
value—for the lovers. 

Although the foregoing discussion has tried in every possi- 
ble way imaginable or unimaginable to gain recognition for 
Mozart’s Don Giovanni as supreme among all classic works, it 
nevertheless has made as good as no attempt to demonstrate 
that this work actually is classic, for the few scattered hints 
found here, by appearing merely as hints, simply show that 
the aim was not to demonstrate but occasionally to illuminate. 
This approach might seem more than odd. To demonstrate 
that Don Giovanni is a classic work in the strictest sense is a task 
for reflection, but the other endeavor is completely irrelevant 
to the proper domain of reflection. The movement of thought 
is calmed by having recognized that it is a classic work and that 
every classic production is equally perfect; to thinking, any- 
thing more one wants to do is suspect. 

To that extent, the entire foregoing part is entangled in a 
self-contradiction and easily disintegrates into nothing. But 
this is quite proper, and such a self-contradiction is deeply 
rooted in human nature. The admiration, sympathy, and ven- 
eration in me, the child in me, the woman in me, demanded 
more than what thought could provide. Thought was calm, 
rested happy in its knowledge; then I went to it and begged it 
to bestir itself once more, to venture the ultimate. It knew very 
well that this was futile, but since 1 am usually on good terms 
with it, it did not refuse me. It labored in vain; egged on by 
me, it was continually going beyond itself and continually col- 
lapsing back into itself. It was continually looking for a foot- 
hold and finding none, continually trying to find bottom, but 
could neither swim nor wade. It was both a laughing and a 
crying matter. Therefore I did both and was very grateful that 
it had not denied me this service. And although I now know 
perfectly well that it is useless, it could still very well occur to 
me to ask thought to play once again the game that to me is 
inexhaustible material for enjoyment. Every reader who finds 
the game boring is, of course, not of my kind; it is meaningless 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 59 


to him, and here as everywhere children who are alike play to- 
gether best. To him, the entire foregoing part is a superfluity; 
whereas to me it has such great importance that I say with 
Horace: 


Exilis domus est, ubi non et multa supersunt 
(Poor is the house where there’s not much to spare].'5 


To him it is foolishness, to me wisdom; to him it is boring, to 
me a source of joy and merriment. 

That kind of reader would therefore be incapable of appre- 
ciating my lyrical thought, which is so ecstatic that it goes be- 
yond thought. But perhaps he would be kind enough to say, 
“We shall not quarrel about that; I skip that part. See now if 
you can come to the far more important matter of demonstrat- 
ing that Don Giovanni is a classic work, for I admit that this 
would be a really appropriate introduction to the exploration 
proper.”’ To what extent it would be an appropriate introduc- 
tion, I shall leave in abeyance, but the trouble here for me is 
that I in turn cannot appreciate him, for no matter how easy it 
may be for me to demonstrate it, it would still never occur to 
me to demonstrate it. But although I always assume the matter 
settled, the following will many times and in many ways'¢ il- 
luminate Don Giovanni in this respect, just as the foregoing 
discussion has already contained a few hints. 


The immediate task of this exploration is to show the sig- 
nificance of the musical-erotic and to that end in turn to indi- 
cate the various stages, which, since they are all characterized 
by the immediate erotic, also harmonize in this, that essen- 
tially they are all musical. What I have to say about this I owe 
solely to Mozart. Therefore, if anyone should be courteous 
enough to admit that I am right in what I aim to set forth but 
has some doubts whether it is in Mozart’s music or whether, 
instead, I put it into the music, I can assure him that not only 
the little Iam able to set forth is in Mozart’s music, but infi- 
nitely much more. Yes, I can assure him that this very thought 
gives me the boldness to venture to try to explain a few things 


43 


60 Either/Or, I 


in Mozart’s music. What one has loved with youthful infatua- 
tion, what one has admired with youthful enthusiasm, that 
with which one has kept secret, enigmatic company in the in- 
wardness of the soul, that which one has hidden in the heart— 
one always approaches this with a certain shyness, with mixed 
feelings, when one knows that the purpose is to understand it. 
What one has come to know piece by piece, just as a bird 
gleans each little straw for itself, happier over each little bit 
than over all the rest of the world; what the loving ear, soli- 
tary, has absorbed, solitary in the great crowd, unnoticed in its 
secret hiding place; what the avid ear has picked up, never sat- 
isfied, what the avaricious ear has preserved, never secure, of 
which the faintest echo has never disappointed the sleepless at- 
tention of the reconnoitering ear; what one has lived in during 
the day and relived at night, what has driven away sleep and 
made it restless, what one has dreamed about in sleep, what 
one has awakened to in order awake to dream about it again, 
for the sake of which one has leaped out of bed in the middle 
of the night out of fear of forgetting it; what has made its ap- 
pearance to one in the most inspired moments, what one has 
always had at hand like a woman’s needlework, what has ac- 
companied one on bright moonlit nights, in lonely forests by 
the lake, on gloomy streets, in the middle of the night, at the 
break of day; what has sat with one on the same horse, what 
has been company in the carriage; what has permeated the 
home, what one’s room has witnessed, what has resonated in 
the ear, what has reverberated in the soul, what the soul has 
spun into its finest fabric—this now shows itself to thought. 
Just as in the old tales those enigmatic beings, draped in sea- 
weed, rise up from the bottom of the sea, so this rises up from 
the sea of recollection, intertwined with mementos. The soul 
becomes sad and the heart mellow, for it is as if one were tak- 
ing leave of it, as if one were parting never to meet again, nei- 
ther in time nor in eternity. One feels that one is being unfaith- 
ful, that one has betrayed one’s pact; one feels that one is no 
longer the same, not as young, not as childlike; one fears for 
oneself, that one will lose what made one happy, blissful, and 
rich; one fears for what one loves, that it will suffer in this 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 61 


change, will perhaps appear less perfect, that it will possibly 
fail to answer the many questions, alas, and then all is lost, the 
magic is gone, and it can never again be evoked. As for Mo- 
zart’s music, my soul knows no fear, my confidence no limits. 
For one thing, what I have understood hitherto is only very lit- 
tle, and enough will always remain, hiding in the shadows of 
presentiment; for another, I am convinced that if Mozart ever 
became entirely comprehensible to me, he would then become 
completely incomprehensible to me. 

To make the claim that Christianity brought sensuality into 
the world seems boldly venturesome. But as they say: Boldly 
ventured is half won. So it also holds here; it will become evi- 
dent upon reflection that in the positing of something, the 
other that is excluded is indirectly posited. Since sensuality 
generally is that which is to be negated, it really comes to light, 
is really posited, first by the act that excludes it through a pos- 
iting of the opposite positive. Sensuality is posited as a princi- 
ple, as a power, as an independent system first by Christianity, 
and to that extent Christianity brought sensuality into the 
world. But if the thesis that Christianity has brought sensual- 
ity into the world is to be understood properly, it must be 
comprehended as identical to its opposite, that it is Christian- 
ity that has driven sensuality out of the world, has excluded 
sensuality from the world. Sensuality was first posited as a 
principle, as a power, as an independent system by Christian- 
ity. I could add one more qualification that perhaps most em- 
phatically shows what I mean: sensuality was placed under the 
qualification of spirit first by Christianity. This is quite natu- 
ral, for Christianity is spirit, and spirit is the positive principle 
it has brought into the world. But when sensuality is viewed 
under the qualification of spirit, its significance is seen to be 
that it is to be excluded, but precisely because it is to be ex- 
cluded it is defined as a principle, as a power, for that which 
spirit, which is itself a principle, is supposed to exclude must 
be something that manifests itself as a principle, even though 
it does not manifest itself as a principle until the moment when 
it is excluded. Of course, to protest against my thesis that sen- 
suality existed in the world prior to Christianity would be 


45 


62 Either/Or, I 


rather foolish, inasmuch as it goes without saying that what- 
ever is to be excluded always exists prior to that which ex- 
cludes it, even though, understood in another way, it comes 
into existence [bliver til] only when it is excluded. This in turn 
occurs because it comes into existence in another sense, and 
that is why I promptly said that boldly ventured is only half 
won. 

Consequently, the sensual certainly did exist in the world 
before, but it was not qualified spiritually. How, then, did it 
exist? It was qualified psychically. This was its nature in pa- 
ganism, and if one wishes to look for its most perfect expres- 
sion, it was in Greece. But the sensual psychically qualified is 
not contrast or exclusion, but harmony and consonance. But 
precisely because the sensual is posited as harmoniously qual- 
ified, it is posited not as a principle but as a consonant encliti- 
con.!? 

This view will be of importance in illuminating the various 
forms the erotic takes in various stages of the development of 
world consciousness and thereby guide us to the category of 
the immediate-erotic as identical with the musical-erotic. In 
Greek culture, the sensuous was controlled in the beautiful in- 
dividuality,'® or, to put it more accurately, it was not con- 
trolled, for it was not an enemy to be subdued, not a danger- 
ous insurgent to be held in check; it was liberated to life and 
joy in the beautiful individuality. Thus the sensuous was not 
posited as a principle. The psychical aspect constituting the 
beautiful individuality was inconceivable without the sen- 
suous; for this reason the erotic based on the sensuous was not 
posited as a principle either. Erotic love [Elskov] was every- 
where present as an element and present as an element in the 
beautiful individuality. The gods, no less than men, knew its 
power; the gods, no less than men, knew happy and unhappy 
love affairs. But in none of them was erotic love present as a 
principle; insofar as it was in them, in the single individual, it 
was there as an element of erotic love’s universal power, 
which, however, was present nowhere and therefore not even 
in the Greek conception or in the Greek consciousness. 

It could be objected that Eros was indeed the god of erotic 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 63 


love and that therefore erotic love must be considered present 
in him as a principle. But apart from the fact that here again 
erotic love does not rest upon the erotic in such a way that this 
is based solely upon the sensuous, but upon the psychical, 
there is also another circumstance to be noted, one that I shall 
now stress in somewhat more detail. Eros was the god of 
erotic love but was not himself in love. Insofar as the other 
gods or men detected the power of erotic love in themselves, 
they attributed it to Eros, traced it back to him, but Eros him- 
self did not fall in love, and if it did happen to him once,!? it 
was an exception; and although he was the god of erotic love, 
he was far behind the other gods, far behind men, in the num- 
ber of his affairs. That he fell in love is as good as to say that 
he, too, yielded to the universal power of erotic love, which 
thus in a way became a power outside himself, which in being 
spurned by him had no place at all now where it could be 
sought. His erotic love is not based on the sensuous, either, but 
upon the psychical. It is a genuinely Greek idea that the god of 
erotic love is not in love himself, whereas all the others are in- 
debted to him for their own falling in love. IfI were to imagine 
a god or a goddess of longing, it would be genuinely Greek 
that, whereas everyone who knew the sweet unrest or pain of 
longing would trace it to this being, this being would itself 
know nothing of longing. 

I know of no more precise way to designate what is distinc~ 
tive in this relation than to say that it is the opposite of a rep- 
resentative relation. In the representative relation, the total 
power is concentrated in a single individual, and the particular 
individuals participate therein to the extent that they partici- 
pate in the particular movements of that one. I could also say 
that this relation is the opposite of the one underlying incar- 
nation. In incarnation, the full plenitude of life is in the single 
individual, and this is for the others only through their behold- 
ing it in the incarnated individual. 

Therefore, in the Greek relation it is the reverse. That which 
is the god’s power is not in the god but in all the other individ- 
uals, who trace it back to him; he himself is almost powerless, 
impotent, because he communicates his power to all the rest of 


47 


64 Either/Or, I 


the world. The incarnated individual imbibes, as it were, 
power from all the others, and thus the fullness is in that one, 
and in the others only insofar as they behold it in this individ- 
ual. This is important for what follows, just as in and by itself 
it is significant with regard to the categories the world con- 
sciousness uses at various times. Hence, we do not find the 
sensuous as a principle in Greek culture; neither do we find the 
erotic as a principle based upon the principle of the sensuous; 
and even if we had found it, we still perceive—something that 
is of the greatest importance in this exploration—that the 
Greek consciousness did not have the strength to concentrate 
all of it in a single individual but from a point that does not 
have it radiates it to all the others in such a way that this con- 
stituting point is almost recognizable by being the only one 
that does not have that which it gives to all the others. 

So it was Christianity that posited sensuality as a principle, 
Just as it posited the sensuous-erotic as a principle. The idea of 
representation was introduced into the world by Christianity. 
If | now imagine the sensuous-erotic as a principle, as a power, 
as a domain, defined in relation to spirit—that is, defined in 
such a way that spirit excludes it—if I imagine this principle 
concentrated in a single individual, then I have the concept of 
the sensuous-erotic in its elemental originality [Genialitet]. 
This is an idea that Greek culture did not have, that Christi- 
anity first introduced into the world, although only indirectly. 

If the elemental originality of the sensuous-erotic in all its 
immediacy insists on expression, then the question arises as to 
which medium is the most suitable for this. The point that par- 
ticularly must be kept in mind here is that it insists on being 
expressed and presented in its immediacy. In its mediacy and 
in being reflected in another medium, it falls within language 
and comes under ethical categories. In its immediacy, it can be 
expressed only in music. In this connection, I must ask the 
reader to recall something said about this in the insignificant 
introduction. The significance of music thereby appears in its 
full validity, and in a stricter sense it appears as a Christian art 
or, more correctly, as the art Christianity posits in excluding it 
from itself, as the medium for that which Christianity ex~- 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 65. 


cludes from itself and thereby posits. In other words, music is 
the demonic. In elemental sensuous-erotic originality, music 
has its absolute theme. This, of course, does not mean that 
music cannot express anything else, but nevertheless this is its 
theme proper. Similarly, sculpture can depict something other 
than human beauty, and yet this is its absolute theme. Painting 
can depict something other than celestially transfigured 
beauty, and yet this is its absolute theme. In this regard, the 
point is to see the basic concept in each art and not to be con- 
fused by whatever else it can do. The basic concept of man is 
spirit, and one should not be confused by the fact that he is also 
able to walk on two feet. The basic concept of language is 
thought, and one should not be confused by the fact that a few 
emotional people are of the opinion that the greatest impor- 
tance of language is in the production of inarticulate sounds. 

At this point, may I be permitted a little insignificant inter- 
lude;” praeterea censeo [furthermore I am of the opinion]?! that 
Mozart is the greatest of all the classic authors, that his Don 
Giovanni deserves the highest place among all the classic 
works. 

As to music regarded as a medium, this, of course, is always 
a very interesting question. Whether I am capable of saying 
anything adequate about it is another question. I am well 
aware that I do not understand music; I readily admit that lam 
a layman. I do not hide the fact that I do not belong to the cho- 
sen tribe of music experts, that at most I stand in the doorway 
as a gentile convert drawn from afar to this place by a strange, 
irresistible impulse—but no further. Yet it is possible that the 
little I have to say, if received with kindness and indulgence, 
may have a single comment that will be found to contain 
something true, even if it is concealed under a peasant’s coat. I 
stand outside music, and from this position I observe it. That 
this position is very imperfect, I readily admit; that compared 
with the lucky ones standing inside I do not manage to see very 
much, I do not deny. But I go on hoping that from my posi- 
tion I, too, can communicate an illuminating detail, although 
the initiated could do it much better—indeed, to a certain de- 
gree even understand better what I say than I do myself. 


48 


66 Either/Or, I 


If I imagined two kingdoms bordering each other, one of 
which I knew rather well and the other not at all, and if how- 
ever much] desired it I were not allowed to enter the unknown 
kingdom, I would still be able to form some idea of it. I would 
go to the border of the kingdom known to me and follow it all 
the way, and in doing so I would by my movements describe 
the outline of that unknown land and thus have a general idea 
of it, although I had never set foot in it. And if this were a labor 
that occupied me very much, if I were unflaggingly scrupu- 
lous, it presumably would sometimes happen that as I stood 
with sadness at the border of my kingdom and gazed long- 
ingly into that unknown country that was so near and yet so 
far, I would be granted an occasional little disclosure. And 
even though I feel that music is an art that requires considera- 
ble experience if one is really to have an opinion on it, I com- 
fort myself again as so often before with the paradox that also 
in presentiment and ignorance one can have a kind of experi- 
ence. It is a comfort to me that Diana, who had not given birth 
herself, came to the aid of women in labor—indeed, that she 
had this ability from infancy as an inborn gift, so that when she 
was born she herself helped Latona in her labor pains.” 

The kingdom that I know, to whose outermost boundary | 
shall go to discover music, is language. If the various media are 
ordered according to a specific process of development, lan- 
guage and music must be placed closest to each other, and that 
is also why it has been said that music is a language, which is 
more than a clever observation. If one is inclined to indulge in 
cleverness, one could say that sculpture and painting, too, are 
each a kind of language, inasmuch as every expression of an 
idea is always a language, since the essence of the idea is lan- 
guage. Clever folk therefore speak of the language of nature, 
and soft-headed clergy occasionally open the book of nature 
for us and read something that neither they nor their listeners 
understand. If the observation that music is a language did not 
amount to anything more than that, I would not bother with 
it but would let it go unchallenged and pass for what it is. But 
that is not the case. Not until spirit is posited is language in- 
stalled in its rights, but when spirit is posited, everything that 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 67 


is not spirit is excluded. Yet this exclusion is a qualification of 
spirit, and consequently, insofar as that which is excluded is to 
affirm itself, it requires a medium that is qualified in relation to 
spirit, and this medium is music. But a medium that is quali- 
fied in relation to spirit is essentially language; now, since mu- 
sic is qualified in relation to spirit, it is legitimately called a lan- 
guage. 

Language, regarded as medium, is the medium absolutely 
qualified by spirit, and it is therefore the authentic medium of 
the idea. To elaborate this more thoroughly is neither within 
my competence nor in the interest of this little inquiry. Just 
one specific comment, which again leads me into music, 
should find a place here. In language, the sensuous as medium 
is reduced to a mere instrument and is continually negated. 
That is not the case with the other media. Neither in sculpture 
nor in painting is the sensuous a mere instrument; it is rather a 
component. It is not to be negated continually, either, for it is 
continually to be seen conjointly. It would be a strangely back- 
ward consideration of a piece of sculpture or of a painting if I 
were to behold it in such a way that I took pains to see it in- 
dependently of the sensuous, whereby I would completely 
cancel its beauty. In sculpture, architecture, and painting, the 
idea is integral to the medium, but the fact that the idea does 
not reduce the medium to a mere instrument, does not contin- 
ually negate it, expresses, as it were, that this medium cannot 
speak. It is the same with nature. Therefore, it is properly said 
that nature is dumb, and architecture and sculpture and paint- 
ing; it is properly said despite all the fine, sensitive ears that can 
hear them speak. Therefore, it is foolish to say that nature is a 
language, certainly as foolish as to say that the mute speaks, 
since it is not even a language in the way sign language is. But 
that is not the case with language. The sensuous is reduced to 
a mere instrument and is thus annulled. If a person spoke in 
such a way that we heard the flapping of his tongue etc., he 
would be speaking poorly; if he heard in such a way that he 
heard the vibrations of the air instead of words, he would be 
hearing poorly; if he read a book in such a way that he contin- 
ually saw each individual letter, he would be reading poorly. 


50 


51 


68 Either/Or, I 


Language is the perfect medium precisely when everything 
sensuous in it is negated. That is also the case with music; that 
which is really supposed to be heard is continually disengaging 
itself from the sensuous. It has already been pointed out that 
music as a medium does not rank as high as language, and that 
is why I said that music, understood in a certain way, is a lan- 
guage. 

Language addresses itself to the ear. No other medium does 
this. The ear, in turn, is the most spiritually qualified sense. 
Most people, I believe, will agree with me on this point. If 
anyone wishes more information about this, I refer him to the 
preface to Steffens’s Karrikaturen des Heiligsten.*? Apart from 
language, music is the only medium that is addressed to the 
ear. Here again is an analogy and a testimony to the sense in 
which music is a language. There is much in nature that is ad- 
dressed to the ear, but what affects the ear is the purely sensate; 
therefore nature is mute, and it is a ludicrous fancy that one 
hears something because one hears a cow bellow or, what is 
perhaps more pretentious, a nightingale warble; it is a fancy 
that one hears something, a fancy that the one is worth more 
than the other, since it is all six of one and a half dozen of the 
other. 

Language has its element in time; all other media have space 
as their element. Only music also occurs in time. But its oc- 
currence in time is in turn a negation of the feelings dependent 
upon the senses [det Sandselige]. That which the other arts pro- 
duce suggests their sensuousness precisely by having its con- 
tinuance in space. There is, of course, much in nature that oc- 
curs in time. For example, when a brook ripples and keeps on 
rippling, there seems to be a qualification of time involved 
therein. But this is not so, and if anyone absolutely insists that 
the qualification of time must be present here, then one must 
say that it certainly is so but that it is spatially qualified. Music 
does not exist except in the moment it is performed, for even 
if a person can read notes ever so well and has an ever so vivid 
imagination, he still cannot deny that only in a figurative sense 
does music exist when it is being read. It actually exists only 
when it is being performed. That might seem an imperfection 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 69 


in this art in comparison with the other arts whose works con- 
tinually exist because they have their continuance in the sen- 
suous. But this is not so. It is indeed a demonstration that it is 
a higher, a more spiritual art. 

Now, if I start with language in order, by a movement 
through it, to sound out music, as it were, the matter looks 
something like this. If I assume that prose is the language form 
that is most remote from music, I already detect in the oration, 
in the sonorous construction of its periods, an echo of the mu- 
sical, which emerges ever more strongly at various stages in 
the poetic declamation, in the metrical construction, in the 
rhyme, until finally the musical element has developed so 
strongly that language leaves off and everything becomes mu- 
sic. Indeed, this is a pet phrase poets use to indicate that they, 
as it were, abandon the idea; it disappears for them, and every- 
thing ends in music. This might seem to imply that music is 
even closer to perfection as a medium than language. But this 
is one of those sentimental misconceptions that sprout only in 
empty heads. That it is a misconception will be pointed out 
later. Here I wish only to draw attention to the remarkable cir- 
cumstance that by a movement in the opposite direction I once 
again encounter music, namely, when I descend from prose 
permeated by the concept until I end up with interjections, 
which in turn are musical, just as a child’s first babbling is mu- 
sical. Here the point certainly cannot be that music is closer to 
perfection as a medium than language, or that music is a richer 
medium than language, unless it is assumed that saying ‘““Uh”’ 
is more valuable than a complete thought. But what does this 
mean—that where language leaves off] find the musical? This 
indeed expresses perfectly that language is bounded by music 
on all sides. 

From this we also see the connection with that misconcep- 
tion that music is supposed to be a richer medium than lan- 
guage. In other words, when language leaves off, music be- 
gins; when, as is said, everything is musical, one is not 
progressing but retrogressing. This is why—and perhaps the 
experts will agree with me on this—I have never had any sym- 
pathy for the sublimated music that thinks it does not need 


52 


53 


70 Either/Or, I 


words. Ordinarily, it thinks itself superior to words, although 
it is inferior. The objection presumably could be made that if 
it is true that language is a richer medium than music, then it 
is incomprehensible that an esthetic analysis of the musical in- 
volves such great difficulty, incomprehensible that here lan- 
guage continually shows itself to be a poorer medium than 
music. But this is neither incomprehensible nor unexplaina- 
ble. Music always expresses the immediate in its immediacy. 
This is also the reason that in relation to language music ap- 
pears first and last, but this also shows that it is a mistake to say 
that music is closer to perfection as a medium. Reflection is 
implicit in language, and therefore language cannot express 
the immediate. Reflection is fatal to the immediate, and there- 
fore it is impossible for language to express the musical, but 
this apparent poverty in language is precisely its wealth. In 
other words, the immediate is the indeterminate, and there- 
fore language cannot grasp it; but its indeterminacy is not its 
perfection but rather a defect in it. We indirectly acknowledge 
this in many ways. For example, we say: I cannot really ex- 
plain why I do this or that in such a way—I play it by ear. For 
something that has no connection with the musical, we often 
use a phrase taken from music but denote thereby the vague, 
the unexplained, the immediate. 

Now, if it is the immediate, qualified by spirit, that receives 
its proper expression in the musical, the question may be 
raised again more pointedly: What kind of immediacy is it that 
is essentially the theme of music? The immediate, qualified by 
spirit, can be qualified in such a way that it either comes within 
the realm of spirit or is outside the realm of spirit. When the 
immediate, qualified by spirit, is qualified in such a way that it 
falls within the realm of spirit, it can certainly find its expres- 
sion in the musical, but this immediacy still cannot be music’s 
absolute theme, for when it is qualified in such a way that it 
will fall within the realm of spirit, this suggests that music is in 
alien territory; it forms a prelude that is continually being an- 
nulled. But if the immediate, qualified by spirit, is qualified in 
such a way that it is outside the realm of spirit, then music has 
in this its absolute theme. For the former immediacy, it is 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 71 


unessential for it to be expressed in music, whereas it is essen- 
tial for it to become spirit and consequently to be expressed in 
language. For the latter, however, it is essential that it be ex- 
pressed in music; it can be expressed only therein and cannot 
be expressed in language, since it is qualified by spirit in such 
a way that it does not come within the realm of spirit and thus 
is outside the realm of language. But the immediacy that is 
thus excluded by spirit is sensuous immediacy. This is linked 
to Christianity. Sensuous immediacy has its absolute medium 
in music, and this also explains why music in the ancient world 
did not become properly developed but is linked to the Chris- 
tian world. So it is the medium for the immediacy that, qual- 
ified by spirit, is qualified in such a way that it is outside the 
realm of spirit. Of course, music can express many other 
things, but this is its absolute theme. It is also easy to discern 
that music is a more sensuous medium than language, inas- 
much as considerably more emphasis is placed on the sensuous 
sound in music than in language. 

Consequently, sensuousness in its elemental originality is 
the absolute theme of music. The sensuous in its essential na- 
ture is absolutely lyrical, and in music it erupts in all its lyrical 
impatience. That is, it is qualified by spirit and therefore is 
power, life, movement, continual unrest, continual succes- 
sion. But this unrest, this succession, does not enrich it; it con- 
tinually remains the same; it does not unfold but incessantly 
rushes forward as if in a single breath. If] were to describe this 
lyricism with a single predicate, I would have to say: It 
sounds—and with this I come back again to the elemental 
originality of the sensuous as that which in its immediacy 
manifests itself musically. 

That on this point even I could say a good deal more, I 
know; that it will be easy for the experts to clear everything up 
in an entirely different way, Iam sure. But since no one, as far 
as I know, has made an attempt to do so or made a move to- 
ward doing so, since they merely go on repeating that Mo- 
zart’s Don Giovanni is the crown among operas without devel- 
oping further what they mean by that, although they all say it 
in a way that clearly shows that they thereby mean to say 


54 


72 Either/Or, I 


something more than that Don Giovanni is the best opera, that 
there is a qualitative difference between it and all other operas, 
which certainly cannot be looked for in anything but the ab- 
solute relation between idea, form, subject matter, and me- 
dium—-since, I repeat, this is the situation, I have broken si- 
lence. Perhaps I have been too hasty; perhaps I would have 
succeeded in saying it better if I had waited even longer. Per- 
haps. I do not know. But this I do know, that I did not hurry 
in order to have the pleasure of talking, that I did not hurry be- 
cause I feared that someone more expert would beat me to it— 
but I hurried because I feared that if 1, too, remained silent the 
stones would begin to speak” in praise of Mozart, to the dis- 
grace of every human being to whom the gift of speech has 
been granted. 

What has already been said I assume will be more or less suf- 
ficient, as far as this little exploration is concerned, since essen- 
tially it is supposed to blaze the trail for a description of the im- 
mediate erotic stages as we come to know them in Mozart. 
Before turning to that, however, I wish to mention a fact that 
from another side can lead our thinking to the absolute relation 
between the sensuous in its elemental originality and the mu- 
sical. It is well known that music has always been the object of 
suspicious attention on the part of religious fervor. Whether it 
is right in this or not does not concern us here, for that would 
indeed have only religious interest. It is not, however, without 
importance to consider what has led to this. If I trace religious 
fervor on this point, I can broadly define the movement as fol- 
lows: the more rigorous the religiousness, the more music is 
given up and words are emphasized. The different stages in 
this regard are represented in world history. The last stage ex- 
cludes music altogether and adheres to words alone. I could 
embellish these statements with a multiplicity of specific com- 
ments, but I shall refrain and merely quote a few words by a 
Presbyterian who appears in a story by Achim v. Arnim: “Wir 
Presbyterianer halten die Orgel ftir des Teufels Dudelsack, 
womit er den Ernst der Betrachtung in Schlummer wiegt, so 
wie der Tanz die guten Vorsitze betaubt [We Presbyterians re- 
gard the organ as the devil’s bagpipe, with which he lulls to 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 73 


sleep the earnestness of contemplation, just as dance deadens 
good intentions].’’&gt; This must be regarded as a remark instar 
omnium [worth them all]. What reason can there be to exclude 
music in order thereby to make words alone predominant? 
That words, when they are misused, can confuse the mind just 
as much as music, all revivalist sects will surely admit. There 
must, then, be a qualitative difference between them. But that 
which religious fervor wants to have expressed is spirit; there- 
fore it requires language, which is the spirit’s proper medium, 
and rejects music, which for it is a sensuous medium and thus 
always an imperfect medium with which to express spirit. 
Whether religious fervor is right in excluding music is, as 
stated, another question, but its view of the relation of music 
to language may be perfectly correct. Music need not be ex- 
cluded, then, but it must be understood that in the realm of 
spirit it nevertheless is an imperfect medium and that conse- 
quently it cannot have its absolute theme in the immediately 
spiritual qualified as spirit. It by no means follows that one 
must regard it as the devil’s work, even though our age pro- 
vides many horrible proofs of the demonic power with which 
music can grip an individual and this individual in turn in- 
trigues and ensnares the crowd, especially a crowd of women, 
in the seductive snares of anxiety by means of the full provoc- 
ative force of voluptuousness. It by no means follows that one 
must regard it as the devil’s work, even though one detects 
with a certain secret horror that this art, more than any other 
art, frequently torments its devotees in a terrible way, a phe- 
nomenon, strangely enough, that seems to have escaped the 
attention of the psychologists and the mass, except on a partic- 
ular occasion when they are alarmed by a desperate individu- 
al’s scream of anxiety. But it is quite noteworthy that in folk 
legends, and consequently in the folk consciousness that the 
legends express, the musical is again the demonic. I cite, as an 
example, Irische Elfenmdrchen by Grimm, 1826, pp. 25, 28, 29, 
and 30.7 

As for the immediate-erotic stages, 1am indebted for what I 
can say about them solely to Mozart, to whom on the whole I 
am indebted for everything. But since the classification I shall 


55 


56 


74 Either/Or, I 


attempt here can only indirectly, through someone else’s 
interpretation, be traced back to him, I have examined myself 
and the classification before beginning in earnest, lest I in any 
way might spoil for myself or a reader the joy of admiring 
Mozart’s immortal works. Anyone who wishes to see Mozart 
in his true immortal greatness must consider his Don Giovanni, 
in comparison with which everything else is incidental, un- 
important. But if one considers Don Giovanni in such a way 
that one includes specific things from Mozart’s other operas in 
this point of view, then I am convinced that one will neither 
disparage him nor harm oneself and one’s neighbor. There 
will be occasion to rejoice that the intrinsic power of music is 
fully expended in Mozart’s music. 

Moreover, when I use the term “‘stage”’ as I did and continue 
to do, it must not be taken to mean that each stage exists in- 
dependently, the one outside the other. I could perhaps more 
appropriately use the word “metamorphosis.” The different 
stages collectively make up the immediate stage, and from this 
it will be seen that the specific stages are more a disclosure of a 
predicate in such a way that all the predicates plunge down in 
the richness of the last stage, since this is the stage proper. The 
other stages have no independent existence; by themselves 
they are only for representation, and from that we also see 
their fortuitousness in relation to the last stage. But since they 
have found a separate expression in Mozart’s music, I shall dis- 
cuss them separately. But, above all, they must not be thought 
of as persons on different levels with respect to consciousness, 
since even the last stage has not yet attained consciousness; at 
all times I am dealing only with the immediate in its total im- 
mediacy. 

The difficulties that always arise when music is made the 
object of esthetic consideration will of course not be absent 
here either. The chief difficulty in the foregoing was that, 
whereas I wanted to demonstrate by way of thought that the 
elemental originality of the sensuous is music’s essential 
theme, this still can be demonstrated properly only by music, 
just as I myself also came to a knowledge of it through music. 
The difficulty with which the subsequent discussion must 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 75 


struggle is more particularly this: since that which music ex- 
presses, the theme under discussion here, is essentially the 
proper theme of music, music expresses it much better than 
language is capable of doing, which shows up very poorly 
alongside it. Indeed, if 1 were dealing with the different levels 
of consciousness, the advantage naturally would be on my side 
and on the side of language, but that is not the case here. Con- 
sequently, what will be developed here can have meaning only 
for the person who has heard and continually keeps on listen- 
ing. For him it perhaps may contain a particular hint that can 
prompt him to listen again. 


FIRST STAGE” 


The first stage is suggested by the Page in Figaro. The point 
here, of course, is not to see a single individual in the Page, 
something one is so easily tempted to do when in thought or 
in actuality the Page is represented by a person. It then be- 
comes difficult to avoid the intrusion of something incidental, 
some irrelevant idea (which more or less does happen with the 
Page in the play), so that he becomes more than he is supposed 
to be, for in a certain sense he promptly becomes that as soon 
as he becomes an individual. But in becoming more, he be- 
comes less; he ceases to be the idea. This is why he cannot be 
given lines, but the music remains the only adequate expres- 
sion, and thus it is noteworthy that Figaro and Don Giovanni, 
in their original form from the hand of Mozart, belong to opera 
seria [serious opera]. If, then, the Page is regarded in this way 
as a mythical character, the characteristic features of the first 
stage will be found expressed in the music. 

The sensuous awakens, yet not to motion but to a still qui- 
escence, not to delight and joy but to deep melancholy. As yet 
desire is not awake; it is intimated in the melancholy. That 
which is desired is continually present in the desire; it arises 
from it and appears in a bewildering dawning. This occurs in 
the sphere of the sensuous, is put at a distance by clouds and 
mists, and is brought closer by reflection in them. Desire pos- 
sesses what will become the object of its desire but possesses it 


57 


76 Either/Or, I 


without having desired it and thus does not possess it. This is 
the painful, but also in its sweetness the fascinating and en- 
chanting contradiction, which with its sadness, its melan- 
choly, resonates through this stage. Its pain consists not in 
there being too little but rather in there being too much. The 
desire is quiet desire, the longing quiet longing, the infatuation 
quiet infatuation, in which the object is stirring and is so close 
to the desire that it is within it. That which is desired floats 
above the desire, sinks down into it, not because of the desire’s 
own drawing power or because of being desired. That which 
is desired does not vanish, does not squirm out of desire’s em- 
brace, for then desire would indeed awaken; but without being 
desired, it is there for desire, which then becomes depressed 
precisely because it cannot begin to desire. As soon as desire 
awakens or, more correctly, in and with its awakening, desire 
and the object of desire are separated; now desire breathes 
freely and soundly, whereas before it could not draw its breath 
because of that which was desired. When desire has not awak- 
ened, that which is desired fascinates and captivates—indeed, 
almost causes anxiety. The desire must have air, must find es- 
cape; this occurs through their being separated. That which is 
desired shyly flees, bashful as a woman, and the separation oc- 
curs; that which is desired vanishes et apparet sublimis [and is 
seen aloft]?’ or in any case outside desire. Painters say that a 
ceiling painted with figures, one alongside the other, presses 
down; a single figure done lightly and elusively elevates the 
ceiling. Such is the relation between desire and the desired in a 
first and a later stage. 

Desire, consequently, which in this stage is present only in 
a presentiment of itself, is devoid of motion, devoid of unrest, 
only gently rocked by an unaccountable inner emotion. Just as 
the life of the plant is confined to the earth, so it is lost in a quiet 
ever-present longing, absorbed in contemplation, and still 
cannot discharge its object, essentially because in a more pro- 
found sense there is no object; and yet this lack of an object is 
not its object, for then it would immediately be in motion, 
then it would be defined, if in no other way, by grief and pain; 
but grief and pain do not have the implicit contradiction char- 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 77 


acteristic of melancholy [Melancholi] and depression [ Tungsin- 
dighed], do not have the ambiguity that is the sweetness in mel- 
ancholy. Although desire in this stage is not qualified as desire, 
although this intimated desire is altogether vague about its ob- 
ject, it nevertheless has one qualification—it is infinitely deep. 
Like Thor, it sucks through a horn, the tip of which rests in the 
ocean;*° but the reason that it cannot suck its object to itself is 
not that the object is infinite, but that this infinity cannot be- 
come an object for it. Thus the sucking [Sugen] does not indi- 
cate a relation to the object but is identical with its sighing 
[Suk], and this is infinitely deep. 

In accord with the description of the first stage given here, 
it is very significant that the music for the role of the Page is 
arranged for a woman’s voice. The inconsistency in this stage 
seems to be suggested by this contradiction; the desire is so 
vague, the object so little separated from it, that what is de- 
sired rests androgynously in the desire, just as in plant life the 
male and female are in one blossom. The desire and the desired 
are joined in this unity, that they both are neutrius generis [of 
neuter gender]. 

Although the speaking lines belong not to the mythical Page 
but to the Page in the play, the poetic character Cherubino, 
and although consequently they cannot be considered in this 
connection, since for one thing they do not belong to Mozart 
and for another they express something entirely different from 
what is under discussion here, I nevertheless want to empha- 
size in some detail one particular line because it gives me an op- 
portunity to characterize this stage in its analogy to a later 
stage. Susanna mocks Cherubino because he, too, is in a way 
infatuated with Marcellina, and the Page has no other answer 
handy than to say: She is a woman.*! With regard to the Page 
in the play, it is essential that he be in love with the countess, 
unessential that he can fall in love with Marcellina, which is 
merely an indirect and paradoxical expression for the violence 
of the passion with which he is captivated by the countess. 
With regard to the mythical Page, it is equally essential that he 
be in love with the countess and with Marcellina, for feminin- 


59 


60 


78 Either/Or, I 


ity is indeed his object, and this they both have in common. 
Therefore, when we later hear about Don Giovanni: 


Even coquettes as old as sixty 
He gladly records in his tally, ? 


we have the perfect analogy to this, except that the intensity 
and firmness of the desire are far more developed. 

Now, if I were to venture an attempt at characterizing Mo- 
zart’s music with a single predicate pertaining to the Page in 
Figaro, I would say: It is intoxicated with erotic love; but, like 
all intoxication, an intoxication with erotic love can also have 
two effects, either a heightened transparent joy of life or a con- 
centrated obscure depression. The latter is the case with the 
music here, and this is indeed proper. The music cannot ex- 
plain why this is so, for it is beyond its power to do that. 
Words cannot express the mood, for it is too heavy and dense 
to be borne by words—only music can render it. The basis of 
its melancholy lies in the deep inner contradiction we tried to 
point out earlier. 

We now leave the first stage, epitomized by the mythical 
Page; we let him, depressed, continue to dream about what he 
has, melancholy, to desire what he possesses. He never goes 
further; he never moves from the spot, for his movements are 
illusory, and hence there is no movement at all. The Page in 
the play is another matter; with true and honest friendliness we 
shall be interested in his future. We congratulate him on hav- 
ing become a captain; we permit him to kiss Susanna once 
more in farewell. We shall not betray him with regard to the 
mark on his forehead, which no one can see except the one 
who knows about it. But no more than this, my good Che- 
rubino, or we shall call the count, and then it will be “Be off! 
There is the door! To your regiment! After all, he is no child, 
and no one knows that better than I do.” 


SECOND STAGE 


This stage is epitomized by Papageno in The Magic Flute.*4 
Here again, of course, the point is to separate the essential 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 79 


from the accidental, to evoke the mythical Papageno and for- 
get the actual character in the play, and especially here, since 
this character in the play has become involved in all sorts of 
dubious nonsense. In this connection, it would not be devoid 
of interest to go through the whole opera to show that its 
theme, regarded as a theme for an opera, is a failure at its deep- 
est level. There would also be no lack of opportunity to illu- 
minate the erotic from a new side by observing how the at- 
tempt to put a more profound ethical view into it, in such a 
way that it tries its hand at all sorts of rather important dialec- 
tical engagements, is a daring venture that has ventured far be- 
yond the boundaries of music, so that it was impossible even 
for a Mozart to invest it with any deeper interest. The distin- 
guishing tendency in this opera is precisely the unmusical, and 
therefore, despite some perfect concert numbers and a few 
deeply moving, pathos-filled lines, it is by no means a classic 
opera. But all this cannot concern us in the present little explo- 
ration. Our only concern here is Papageno. This is a great ad- 
vantage for us, if for no other reason than that we are thereby 
exempt from any attempt to explain the significance of Papa- 
geno’s relation to Tamino, a relation that in design appears so 
profound and thoughtful that it practically becomes unthink- 
able because of its very thoughtfulness. 

Such a treatment of The Magic Flute perhaps could seem ar- 
bitrary to one or another reader, because it sees both too much 
in Papageno and too little in the rest of the opera; he may not 
be able to sanction our conduct. This is because he does not 
agree with us on the point of departure for any consideration 
of Mozart’s music. This, in our judgment, is Don Giovanni, 
and it is also our conviction—without denying the importance 
of making each opera the subject of a special study—that the 
greatest veneration of Mozart is shown if several other operas 
are looked at in relation to this one. 

Desire awakens, and just as we always realize that we have 
dreamed only in the moment we awaken, so also here—the 
dream is over. This awakening in which desire awakens, this 
jolt, separates desire and its object, gives desire an object. A di- 
alectical qualification that must be strictly maintained is this: 


61 


62 


80 Either/Or, I 


only when there is an object is there desire; only when there is 
desire is there an object. The desire and the object are twins, 
neither of which comes into the world one split second before 
the other. But even though they came into the world abso- 
lutely coinstantaneously, and even though they do not have an 
interval of time between them, as twins generally have, the 
significance of this coming into existence [Tilblivelse] is not 
that they are united but rather that they are separated. But this 
movement of the sensuous, this earthquake, splits the desire 
from its object infinitely for a moment; but just as the moving 
principle shows itself for a moment as disuniting, so it mani- 
fests itself in turn as wanting to unite the separated. The result 
of the separation is that desire is torn out of its substantial re- 
pose in itself, and as a consequence of this, the object no longer 
falls under the rubric of substantiality but splits up into a mul- 
tiplicity. 

Just as the plant’s life is confined to the soil, so the first stage 
is captivated in substantial*&gt; longing. Desire awakens, the ob- 
ject flees, multiple in its manifestation; longing tears itself 
loose from the soil and takes to wandering. The flower ac- 
quires wings and flutters, fitful and tireless, here and there. 
Desire turns toward the object; it is also internally moved. The 
heart beats, sound and happy; the objects swiftly appear and 
vanish, but before each disappearance there is nevertheless an 
instant of enjoyment, a moment of contact, short but sweet, 
glowworm brilliant, fitful and fleeting as the alighting of a 
butterfly, and as harmless, and there are innumerable kisses, 
but so quickly enjoyed that seemingly only that is taken from 
one object which is bestowed on the next. Only momentarily 
is there a presentiment of a deeper desire, but this presentiment 
is forgotten. 

In Papageno, desire aims at discoveries. This urge to dis- 
cover is the pulsation in it, its liveliness. It does not find the 
proper object of this exploration, but it discovers the multi- 
plicity in seeking therein the object that it wants to discover. In 
this way desire is awakened, but it is not qualified as desire. If 
it is kept in mind that desire is present in all three stages, then 
it can be said that in the first stage it is qualified as dreaming, in 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 81 


the second as seeking, in the third as desiring. That is, the seek- 
ing desire is not yet desiring desire; it is only seeking that 
which it can desire but does not desire it. Therefore, perhaps 
the most suggestive predicate for it is: it discovers. If we com- 
pare Papageno with Don Giovanni, then his journey through 
the world is something more than a journey of discovery; not 
only does he enjoy the adventure of a journey of discovery, 
but he is a knight who is out for victories (veni—vidi—vice [I 
came, I saw, I conquered]).*° The discovery and the victory are 
identical here; indeed, in a certain sense one may say that in the 
victory he forgets the discovery or that the discovery lies be- 
hind him, and he therefore leaves it to his servant and secretary 
Leporello, who keeps a list in quite another sense than I would 
imagine Papageno would keep an account. Papageno selects, 
Don Giovanni enjoys, Leporello reviews. 

As with every stage, I can represent in thought what is char- 
acteristic of this stage, but always only in the moment it has 
ceased to be. But even if I could describe ever so completely 
what is characteristic of it and give the reason for it, there 
would always be something left over that I cannot express and 
that nevertheless wants to be heard. It is too immediate to be 
contained in words. So it is with Papageno—it is the same 
song, the same melody; he begins all over again as soon as he 
finishes, and so on continually. The objection could be made 
to me that it is altogether impossible to express something im- 
mediate. In a way, this is entirely correct, but, in the first 
place, the immediacy of spirit has its immediate expression in 
language, and, in the second place, if a change occurs in it 
through the intervention of thought, it still remains essentially 
the same simply because it is a qualification of spirit. But here 
it is an immediacy of the sensuous, which as such has a com- 
pletely different medium, where as a consequence the dispar- 
ity between the media makes the impossibility absolute. 

If I were to venture to characterize with a single predicate 
the Mozart music in the part of the play that concerns us, I 
would say: It is exuberant, merrily twittering, bubbling over 
with love. What I must emphasize particularly is the first aria 
and the chimes; the duet with Pamina and later with Papagena 


63 


64 


82 Either/Or, I 


falis completely outside the qualification of the immediate- 
musical. But if one takes the first aria into consideration, then 
one presumably will approve the predicates I have used and, if 
one pays closer attention, will also have the opportunity to see 
what importance the musical has where it appears as the ab- 
solute expression for the idea and how this as a consequence is 
immediate-musical. As is known, Papageno accompanies his 
cheerful liveliness on a reed flute. Surely every ear has felt 
strangely moved by this accompaniment. But the more one 
thinks about it, the more one sees in Papageno the mythical 
Papageno, the more expressive and the more characteristic it 
proves to be. One does not weary of hearing it over and over 
again, for it is the absolutely adequate expression of Papage- 
no’s whole life, whose whole life is such an uninterrupted 
twittering, without a care twittering away uninterruptedly in 
complete idleness, and who is happy and contented because 
this is the substance of his life, happy in his work and happy in 
his singing. As is known, the opera is very profoundly de- 
signed in such a way that Tamino’s and Papageno’s flutes har- 
monize with each other. And yet what a difference! Tamino’s 
flute, which nevertheless is the one the play is named after, 
miscarries completely, and why? Because Tamino simply is 
not a musical character. This is due to the misbegotten struc- 
ture of the whole opera. Tamino with his flute becomes very 
boring and sentimental, and if all the rest of his development, 
his state of consciousness, is considered, then every time he 
takes out his flute and blows a piece on it one thinks of the 
peasant in Horace (rusticus exspectat, dum defluat amnis {the 
bumpkin waiting for the river to run out]),*” except that Hor- 
ace did not give his peasant a flute for pointless pastime. As a 
dramatic character, Tamino is completely beyond the musical, 
just as in general the spiritual development the play wants to 
accomplish is a completely unmusical idea. Tamino has simply 
come so far that the musical ceases, and therefore his flute 
playing is only a waste of time to drive away thoughts. Music 
is indeed excellent for driving away thoughts, even evil 
thoughts, as in the case of David, whose playing is said to have 
driven away Saul’s evil mood.** But there is a considerable il- 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 83 


lusion here, for it does so only insofar as it leads the conscious- 
ness back into immediacy and soothes it therein. Therefore, 
the individual may feel happy in the moment of intoxication 
but becomes only all the more unhappy. Here I may be per- 
mitted a comment quite in parenthesi. Music has been used to 
cure insanity and in a certain sense this goal has been attained, 
and yet this is an illusion. When insanity has a mental basis, it 
is always due to a hardening at some point in the conscious- 
ness. This hardening must be overcome, but for it to be truly 
overcome the road to be taken must be the very opposite of the 
one that leads to music. When music is used, one is on the 
wrong road altogether and makes the patient even more in- 
sane, even if he seems not to be so anymore. 

What I have said about Tamino’s flute playing I presumably 
can let stand without fear of having it misunderstood. It is not 
at all my intention to deny what in fact has been acknowledged 
many times, that music may have its importance as an accom- 
paniment when entering a foreign domain, namely, the do- 
main of language. The defect, however, in The Magic Flute is 
that the whole piece tends toward consciousness, and as a con- 
sequence the actual tendency of the piece is to annul the music, 
and yet it is supposed to be an opera, and not even this idea is 
clear in the piece. Ethically qualified love or marital love is set 
as the goal of the action, and therein lies the play’s basic defect, 
for whatever that is, ecclesiastically or secularly speaking, one 
thing it is not, it is not musical—indeed, it is absolutely un- 
musical. 

The first aria, then, has its great importance musically as the 
immediate-musical expression of Papageno’s whole life—and 
history, which is the absolutely adequate expression for this in 
the same degree that music is, is history only metaphorically. 
The chimes, however, are the musical expression for his activ- 
ity, of which, in turn, a notion is gained only through the mu- 
sic; it is enchanting, tempting, alluring, just like the playing of 
the man who made the fish stop and listen. *? 

The spoken lines, which are either Schikaneder’s or the 
Danish translator’s,*° are generally so lunatic and foolish that 
it is almost incomprehensible how Mozart has brought as 


65 


84 Either/Or, I 


much out of them as he has done. To have Papageno say of 
himself, “I am a child of nature,’’*! and then in the very same 
moment make a liar of himself, can be regarded as an example 
instar omnium [worth them all]. An exception could be made of 
the words in the text of the first aria, that he puts the girls he 
catches into his cage.* If one puts a little more into them than 
the author himself in all likelihood did, then they characterize 
precisely the innocence of Papageno’s activity, just as we have 
suggested above. 

We now leave the mythical Papageno. The fate of the actual 
Papageno cannot concern us. We wish him happiness with his 
little Papagena, and we gladly let him seek his joy in populat- 
ing a primeval forest or a whole continent with nothing but 
Papagenos.¥ 


THIRD STAGE 


This stage is epitomized by Don Giovanni. Here lam not in the 
position, as heretofore, of having to isolate a specific portion 
of an opera; here the point is not to separate but to synthesize, 
since the whole opera is essentially the expression of the idea 
and, with the exception of a few particular numbers, centers 
essentially in this and with dramatic necessity gravitates to this 
as its pivot. Here again there will be occasion to see in what 
sense I can call the previous stages by that name when I call 
Don Giovanni the third stage. | indicated earlier that they do 
not have any separate existence, and since my starting point is 
this third stage, which actually is the whole stage, they cannot 
very well be regarded as one-sided abstractions or preliminary 
anticipations, but rather as intimations of Don Giovanni, ex- 
cept that there still is always something left over that some- 
what justifies use of the word “‘stage’”—namely, that they are 
one-sided intimations, that every one of them intimates only 
one side. 

The contradiction in the first stage consisted in the inability 
of desire to find an object, but, without having desired, desire 
did possess its object and therefore could not begin desiring. In 
the second stage, the object appears in its multiplicity, but 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 85 


since desire seeks its object in this multiplicity, in the more 
profound sense it still has no object; it is still not qualified as 
desire. In Don Giovanni, however, desire is absolutely quali- 
fied as desire; intensively and extensively it is the immediate 
unity of the two previous stages. The first stage ideally desired 
the one; the second desired the particular in the category of 
multiplicity; the third stage is the unity of the two. In the par- 
ticular, desire has its absolute object; it desires the particular 
absolutely. In this resides the seductiveness that we shall dis- 
cuss later. In this stage, therefore, desire is absolutely genuine, 
victorious, triumphant, irresistible, and demonic. Therefore, 
of course, it must not be overlooked that the issue here is not 
desire in a particular individual but desire as a principle, qual- 
ified by spirit as that which spirit excludes. This is the idea of 
the elemental originality of the sensuous, as suggested above. 
The expression for this idea is Don Juan, and the expression 
for Don Juan, in turn, is simply and solely music. It is espe- 
cially these two observations that will now be stressed contin- 
ually from various sides, and thereby the classic significance of 
this opera will be indirectly demonstrated. Meanwhile, to 
make it easier for the reader to maintain an overview, I shall 
attempt to gather the scattered observations under specific 
themes. 

To say something specific about this music is not my aim, 
and with the aid of all congenial spirits I shall take care not to 
scare up a mass of pointless but very noisy predicates or in lin- 
guistic excess to make manifest the impotence of language— 
and all the more so since I regard it not as an imperfection on 
the part of language but as a high potency, but for this reason 
Iam more willing to acknowledge music within its boundary. 
What I want to do, however, is in part to illuminate the idea 
from as many sides as possible and its relation to language and 
thereby continually to encompass more and more the territory 
where music is at home, to provoke it, so to speak, to declare 
itself, without my being able to say, when it can be heard, any 
more than: Listen. I think that thereby I have wanted to do the 
best that esthetics is able to do; whether I shall be successful is 
another matter. In only a single place will a predicate, like an 


67 


68 


86 Either/Or, I 


arrest warrant, provide a description of it, but I shall not there- 
fore forget or allow my reader to forget that the person who 
has an arrest warrant in his hand has by no means thereby ap- 
prehended the person it names. Furthermore, the design of the 
whole opera, its inner structure, will be discussed separately in 
the appropriate place, but again in such a way that I do not per- 
mit myself to shout loudly enough for two: Oh, bravo, schwere 
Noth, Gotts Blitz, bravissimo but just keep on tempting forth 
the musical and think that thereby I have wanted to do the best 
one is capable of doing purely esthetically with the musical. 
Therefore, I shall not give a running commentary on the mu- 
sic, which essentially cannot contain anything but subjective 
incidentals and idiosyncrasies and can apply only to something 
corresponding in the reader. Even a commentator like Dr. 
Hotho,* so discriminating and fertile in reflection, so copious 
in expression, has been unable to avoid, on the one hand, hav- 
ing his interpretation deteriorate into verbiage (which is sup- 
posed to constitute recompense for Mozart’s sonority or 
sound like a faint echo, a pale copy of Mozart’s rich, full-toned 
luxuriance) and, on the other hand, having Don Giovanni at 
times become more than he is in the opera, become a reflective 
individual, and at times become less. The latter comes about, 
of course, because the deep and absolute point of Don Giovanni 
has escaped Hotho. For him Don Giovanni is still only the best 
opera; it is not qualitatively different from all other operas. 
But if one has not discerned this with the ubiquitous certainty 
of the speculative eye, then one cannot speak worthily or val- 
idly about Don Giovanni, even though, if one has discerned it, 
one would be able to speak far more magnificently and richly 
and, above all, more truthfully about it than the one who here 
dares to speak. 

I shall, however, continually track down the musical in the 
idea, the situation, etc., explore it by listening, and when I 
have brought the reader to the point of being so musically re- 
ceptive that he seems to hear the music although he hears noth- 
ing, then I shall have finished my task, then I shall fall silent, 
then I shall say to the reader, as I say to myself: Listen. You 
friendly jinn who protect all innocent love, I commit my 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 87 


whole mind to you; guard my laboring thoughts so that they 
may be found worthy of the subject; form my soul into a eu- 
phonious instrument; let the gentle breeze of eloquence hasten 
over it; send the refreshment and blessing of fruitful moods! 
You righteous spirits, you who guard the boundaries of the 
kingdom of beauty, guard me lest I, in confused enthusiasm 
and blind zeal to make Don Giovanni all in all, do it an injustice, 
disparage it, make it something other than what it really is, 
which is the highest! You powerful spirits who know how to 
grasp men’s hearts, stand by me so that I may capture the 
reader, not in the net of passion or the wiles of eloquence, but 
in the eternal truth of conviction. 


1. The Elementary Originality of the Sensuous Qualified as 
Seduction 


When the idea of Don Juan emerged is not known; only this 
much is certain—that it is linked to Christianity and through 
Christianity to the Middle Ages. Even if the idea could not be 
traced with some certainty back to this world-historical period 
in the human consciousness, every doubt would be removed 
at once by a consideration of the inner nature of the idea. On 
the whole, the Middle Ages is the idea, partly conscious, 
partly unconscious, of representation; the totality is repre- 
sented in a particular individual, yet in such a way that it is 
only a particular aspect that is defined as the totality and that is 
now manifest in a particular individual, who is therefore both 
more than and less than an individual. Then alongside this in- 
dividual stands another individual, who just as totally repre- 
sents another aspect of the content of life—for example, the 
knight and the scholastic, the clergyman and the layman. Here 
the great dialectic of life is continually exemplified in repre- 
sentative individuals, who are ordinarily paired opposite to 
each other. Life is continually approached sub una specie [under 
one form], and there is no inkling of the great dialectical unity 
that life possesses in unity sub utraque specie [under both 
forms].*° The contrasts, therefore, are generally indifferent, 
detached from one another. Of this the Middle Ages was not 
aware. Thus the Middle Ages itself actualized the idea of rep- 


69 


88 Either/Or, I 


resentation unconsciously, whereas a later reflection first per- 
ceives the idea in it. 

If the Middle Ages places before its own consciousness an 
individual as representative of the idea, then it usually places 
another individual] alongside him in relation to him. This re- 
lation, then, is customarily a comic relation, in which one in- 
dividual, as it were, makes up for the other’s disproportionate 
magnitude in actual life. For example, the king has the fool by 
his side, Faust has Wagner, Don Quixote has Sancho Panza, 
Don Juan has Leporello. This structure also is linked essen- 
tially to the Middle Ages. Consequently the idea is linked to 
the Middle Ages, but in the Middle Ages it is not linked to a 
particular poet—it is one of those powerful, primitive ideas 
that emerge from the folk consciousness with autochthonic 
originality. 

The Middle Ages had to make the discord between the flesh 
and the spirit that Christianity brought into the world the sub- 
ject of its reflection and to that end personified each of the con- 
flicting forces. Don Juan, then, if I dare say so, is the incarna- 
tion of the flesh, or the inspiration of the flesh by the spirit of 
the flesh itself. This notion has already been brought out suf- 
ficiently in the foregoing discussion; what I would like to call 
attention to here, however, is whether Don Juan ought to be 
assigned to the earlier or later Middle Ages. That he stands in 
an essential relation to the Middle Ages is easy for anyone to 
see. Either he is the contentious, mistaken anticipation of the 
erotic, which became manifest in the knight, or chivalry is still 
only a relative contrast to spirit, and not until the contrast split 
even more deeply did Don Juan emerge as sensuality that is 
mortally opposed to spirit. The erotic in the age of chivalry has 
a certain resemblance to that in Greek culture in that both are 
psychically qualified, but the difference is that its psychical 
qualification lies within a universal spiritual qualification or a 
qualification as totality. The idea of femininity is continually 
in motion in many ways, which was not the case in Greek cul- 
ture, where everyone was just the beautiful individuality but 
there was no intimation of femininity. Therefore, in the con- 
sciousness of the Middle Ages, the erotic of chivalry was also 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 89 


in a moderately conciliatory relation to spirit, even though 
spirit in its zealous rigor held it suspect. 

If the point of departure is that the principle of spirit is pos- 
ited in the world, then, on the one hand, it may be supposed 
that the most striking contrast, the most scandalous separa- 
tion, was the first to appear, and thereafter it was gradually 
mitigated. In that case, Don Juan belongs to the earlier Middle 
Ages. But ifit is assumed that the relation gradually developed 
into this absolute contrast, which is also more natural inas- 
much as spirit takes more and more of its shares of stock out 
of the united corporation in order to work alone, whereby the 
real oxdvdahov [offense] comes to light, then Don Juan belongs 
to the later Middle Ages. Then we are led in time to the point 
where the Middle Ages begins to soar, where we then also 
meet a related idea, namely, Faust, except that Don Juan must 
be placed a little earlier. As spirit, qualified solely as spirit, re- 
nounces this world, feels that the world not only is not its 
home but is not even its stage, and withdraws into the higher 
realms, it leaves the worldly behind as the playground for the 
power with which it has always been in conflict and to which 
it now yields ground. Then, as spirit disengages itself from the 
earth, the sensuous shows itself in all its power. It has no ob- 
jection to the change; indeed, it perceives the advantage in 
being separated and is happy that the Church does not induce 
them to remain together but cuts in two the band that binds 
them. 

Stronger than ever before, the sensuous now awakens in al] 
its profusion, in all its rapture and exultation, and—just as that 
hermit in nature, taciturn echo, who never speaks first to any- 
one or speaks without being asked, derived such great pleasure 
from the knight’s hunting horn and from his melodies of 
erotic love [Elskov], from the baying of the hounds, from the 
snorting of the horses, that it never wearied of repeating it 
again and again and finally, as it were, repeated it very softly 
to itself in order not to forget it—so it was that the whole 
world on all sides became a reverberating abode for the 
worldly spirit of sensuousness, whereas spirit had forsaken the 
world. 


71 


72 


90 Either/Or, I 


In the Middle Ages, much was told about a mountain that is 
not found on any map; it is called Mount Venus. There sen- 
suousness has its home; there it has its wild pleasures, for it is 
a kingdom, a state. In this kingdom, language has no home, 
nor the collectedness of thought, nor the laborious achieve- 
ments of reflection; there is heard only the elemental voice of 
passion, the play of desires, the wild noise of intoxication. 
There everything is only one giddy round of pleasure. The 
firstborn of this kingdom is Don Juan. But it is not said 
thereby that it is the kingdom of sin, for it must be contained 
in the moment when it appears in esthetic indifference. Only 
when reflection enters in does the kingdom manifest itself as 
the kingdom of sin, but then Don Juan has been slain, then the 
music stops, then one sees only the desperate defiance that 
powerlessly resists but can find no firm ground, not even in 
sounds. When sensuousness manifests itself as that which 
must be excluded, as that with which the spirit does not wish 
to be involved, but when spirit has not as yet convicted it or 
condemned it, sensuousness takes this form, is the demonic in 
esthetic indifference. It is a matter of only a moment; soon all 
is changed, and then the music, too, is over. Faust and Don 
Juan are the Middle Ages’ titans and giants, who in the grand- 
ness of their achievements are not different from those of an- 
tiquity, except admittedly in this, that they stand isolated, do 
not form an amalgamation of powers that only through amal- 
gamation become heaven-storming; instead, all the power is 
concentrated in this one individual. 

Don Juan, then, is the expression for the demonic qualified 
as the sensuous; Faust is the expression for the demonic quali- 
fied as the spiritual that the Christian spirit excludes. These 
ideas have an essential relation to each other and are very sim- 
ilar, and consequently it could be expected that they also have 
this in common, that both have been preserved in a legend. As 
is known, this is the case with Faust. There is a folk book,** the 
title of which is rather familiar even though the book itself is 
little used, which is especially strange in our age when every- 
body is so engrossed in the idea of Faust. So it goes—while 
every would-be assistant professor or professor thinks he will 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 91 


be accredited as intellectually mature by the reading public 
through the publication of a book about Faust, in which he 
faithfully repeats what all the other graduates and scholarly 
confirmands have already said, he thinks he dares to ignore 
such an insignificant little folk book. It never occurs to him 
how beautiful it is that true greatness is common to all, that a 
farmhand goes to Tribler’s widow“ or to a ballad-monger on 
Halmtorv® and reads it half aloud to himself at the same time 
Goethe is writing a Faust. Indeed, this folk book deserves at- 
tention. Above all, it has what is praised as a commendable 
quality in wine: it has bouquet. It is a splendid vintage from the 
Middle Ages, and, when it is opened, such an aromatic, deli- 
cious, and distinctive fragrance flows forth that one has a very 
special feeling. 

But enough of this. I would only point out that there is no 
such legend about Don Juan. No folk book, no ballad has pre- 
served his memory by being published continually this year.°° 
Presumably a legend has existed nevertheless, but in all prob- 
ability it was limited to only a few hints that were perhaps even 
briefer than the few stanzas on which Birger’s Lenore*! is 
based. Perhaps it contained only a number, for, unless I am 
greatly mistaken, the present number, 1,003,°? does belong to 
a legend. A legend that has nothing else seems somewhat mea- 
ger and in a way easily accounts for its not being written 
down, but still this number has an excellent quality, a lyrical 
recklessness, which many perhaps do not notice because they 
are so accustomed to seeing it. Although this idea has not 
found its expression in a folk legend, it has been preserved in 
another way. As is known, Don Juan existed long ago as mel- 
odrama; indeed, this was probably its first existence. But here 
the idea was conceived comically; moreover, it is noteworthy 
that just as the Middle Ages was very proficient in fitting out 
ideals, it was equally sure to see the comic in the preternatural 
magnitude of the ideal. To make Don Juan a braggart who 
imagined he had seduced all the girls and to have Leporello be- 
lieve his lies certainly was not an altogether bad comic design. 
And even if that has not been the case, even if that has not been 
the idea, the comic twist still could never be avoided, since it 


74 


92 Either/Or, I 


is implicit in the contradiction between the hero and the arena 
in which he moves. Thus the Middle Ages may be allowed to 
tell about heroes so mightily constructed that their eyes were 
a foot apart, but if an ordinary man were to come onstage 
and pretend to have eyes a foot apart, the comic would be well 
under way. 

The above remarks about the legend of Don Juan would not 
have been included here if they were not closely related to the 
subject of this study, if they did not serve to lead our thoughts 
to the goal already set. The reason that this idea, compared 
with Faust, has such a meager past is no doubt due to some- 
thing enigmatic in it as long as it was not perceived that music 
is its proper medium. Faust is idea, but an idea that also is es- 
sentially an individual. To conceive of the spiritual-demonic 
concentrated in one individual is natural to thought, whereas 
to conceive of the sensuous in one individual is impossible. 
Don Juan continually hovers between being idea—that is, 
power, life—and being an individual. But this hovering is the 
musical vibration. When the sea heaves and is rough, the 
seething waves in their turbulence form pictures resembling 
creatures; it seems as if it were these creatures that set the 
waves in motion, and yet it is, conversely, the swelling waves 
that form them. Thus, Don Juan is a picture that is continually 
coming into view but does not attain form and consistency, an 
individual who is continually being formed but is never fin- 
ished, about whose history one cannot learn except by listen- 
ing to the noise of the waves. 

When Don Juan is comprehended in this way, there is 
meaning and deep significance in everything. If I imagine a 
particular individual, if I see him or hear him talk, then his 
having seduced 1,003 becomes comic; for as soon as he is a par- 
ticular individual, the accent falls on an altogether different 
place—that is, the emphasis is on those whom he has seduced 
and how. The naiveté of legend and popular superstition can 
successfully state such things without hinting at the comic; for 
reflection, this is not possible. But when he is conceived in 
music, then I do not have the particular individual, then I have 
a force of nature, the demonic, which no more wearies of se- 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 93 


ducing or is through with seducing than the wind with blow- 
ing a gale, the sea with rocking, or a waterfall with plunging 
down from the heights. For that matter, the number of the se- 
duced can just as well be any number whatever, a much larger 
number. 

In translating the libretto for an opera, the translator fre- 
quently has a very difficult task to do it so accurately that not 
only is the translation singable but the meaning harmonizes 
fairly well with the text and thus with the music. I cite, as an 
example of its sometimes being an altogether indifferent mat- 
ter, the number in the list in Don Giovanni, without, however, 
taking it as lightly as people usually would take it, thinking 
that nothing depends on such things. On the contrary, I view 
the matter with great esthetic seriousness and therefore regard 
it as a matter of indifference. But I do want to commend one 
quality of the number 1,003—namely, that it is uneven and ac- 
cidental, which is by no means unimportant; it gives the 
impression that the list is not at all final, but rather that Don 
Giovanni is on the move. We almost feel sorry for Leporello, 
who not only, as he himself says, must hold watch outside the 
door but, in addition, must keep account books so complex 
that they would give an experienced office secretary enough to 
do. 

The sensuous as it is conceived in Don Juan, as a principle, 
has never before been so conceived in the world; for this rea- 
son the erotic is here qualified by another predicate: here the 
erotic is seduction. Strangely enough, the idea of a seducer was 
totally lacking in Greek culture. It is not my intention to laud 
Greek culture in any way for this, because, as everyone 
knows, the gods as well as human beings were promiscuous in 
love affairs; neither do I censure Christianity, for, after all, it 
has the idea only outside itself. The reason Greek culture lacks 
this idea is that its whole life is qualified as individuality. Thus 
the psychical is predominant, or always in harmony with the 
sensuous. Its love was therefore psychical, not sensuous, and 
it is this that instills the modesty that rests over all Greek love. 
They fell in love with a girl, moved heaven and earth to pos- 
sess her; when they succeeded, they perhaps grew weary of 


rh) 


94 Either/Or, I 


her and sought a new love. In their inconstancy, they certainly 
could have a certain resemblance to Don Juan, and, to mention 
just one example, Hercules undoubtedly could provide a con- 
siderable list if one bears in mind that he sometimes took in- 
terest in entire families, numbering as many as fifty maidens™ 
and, as a kind of family son-in-law, polished them all off, by 
some accounts, in a single night. Yet he is essentially different 
from a Don Juan: he is no seducer. When one reflects on Greek 
love, it is according to its concept essentially faithful simply 
because it is psychical; and it is something accidental in the par- 
ticular individual that he loves many; and with regard to the 
many he loves, it is again accidental every time he loves anew 
one; when he loves one, he is not thinking of the next one. 

Don Juan, however, is a downright seducer. His love is sen- 
suous, not psychical, and, according to its concept, sensuous 
love is not faithful but totally faithless; it loves not one but 
all—that is, it seduces all. It is indeed only in the moment, but 
considered in its concept, that moment is the sum of mo- 
ments, and so we have the seducer. Chivalric love is also psy- 
chical and therefore, according to its concept, essentially faith- 
ful; only the sensuous, according to its concept, is essentially 
faithless. But its faithlessness manifests itself in another way 
also: it continually becomes only a repetition. 

Psychical love contains the dialectical in two ways. For one 
thing, there is in it doubt and disquietude about whether it will 
be happy, see its desire fulfilled, and be loved. Sensuous love 
does not have this concern. Even a Jupiter is unsure of his vic- 
tory, and this cannot be otherwise; indeed, he himself cannot 
wish it otherwise. This is not the case with Don Juan; he is 
brisk about his business and must always be regarded as com- 
pletely victorious. This could seem to be to his advantage, but 
it is actually destitution. Furthermore, psychical love also has 
another dialectic in that it is different also according to the re- 
lationship with each particular individual who is the object of 
love. Therein lies its richness, its fullness of content. 

Such is not the case with Don Juan. For this he has no time; 
for him everything is merely an affair of the moment. Ina cer- 
tain sense it can be said of psychical love that to see her and to 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 95 


love her are the same, but this only suggests a beginning. It 
holds true in a different way in connection with Don Juan. To 
see her and to love her are the same; this is in the moment. In 
the same moment everything is over, and the same thing re- 
peats itself indefinitely. If one imagines Don Juan as having 
psychical love, then to place 1,003 in Spain becomes ludicrous 
and a contradiction that is not even in accordance with the 
idea. It becomes an extravagance with a disturbing effect, even 
if one fancied that he was conceived ideally. If there is no me- 
dium other than language to describe this love, then one is in 
trouble, for as soon as one has given up the naiveté that can 
simple-mindedly maintain that in Spain there are 1,003, some- 
thing more is demanded: namely, psychical individualizing. 
The esthetic is not at all satisfied with tossing everything to- 
gether this way and wanting to astonish with the size of the 
number. Psychical love moves precisely in the rich variety of 
the individual life, where the nuances are the really significant. 
Sensuous love, however, can toss everything together. For it, 
the essential is completely abstract femininity and at most the 
more sensuous difference. Psychical love is continuance in 
time; sensuous love is disappearance in time, but the medium 
that expresses this is indeed music. 

Music is superbly suited to achieve this, since it is much 
more abstract than language and therefore articulates not the 
particular but the universal in all its universality, and yet it ar- 
ticulates this universality not in the abstraction of reflection 
but in the concretion of immediacy. To give an example of 
what I mean, I shall discuss in some detail the second servant 
aria: the list of those seduced. This number may be regarded as 
Don Juan’s true epic. 

If you doubt the correctness of what I say, then try an imag- 
inary construction. Imagine a poet, one more fortunately 
equipped by nature than anyone preceding him. Give him 
richness of expression; give him mastery and authority over 
the powers of language; let everything that has a breath of life 
be obedient to him, submissive to his slightest hint; let every- 
thing wait, prepared and primed, upon his word of command; 
let him be surrounded by a considerable company of light skir- 


76 


77 


96 Either/Or, I 


mishers, fleet-footed messengers who run down thought in its 
swiftest flight; let nothing escape him, not even the slightest 
movement; let him lack no secret, nothing ineffable, in the en- 
tire world—then give him the task of celebrating Don Juan in 
epic style, of unrolling the list of the seduced. What will be the 
result: he will never finish. The defect, if you please, of the epic 
is that it can go on as long as necessary; his hero, the impro- 
viser, Don Juan, can go on as long as necessary. The poet will 
now introduce multiplicity, and there will always be enough 
in it that will please, but he will never achieve the effect Mozart 
achieved, for even if he did eventually finish,* he still would 
not have said half of what Mozart has expressed in this one 
number. 

Mozart did not become involved in multiplicity; there are 
certain large formations that pass by. This has an adequate ba- 
sis in the medium itself, in the music, which is too abstract to 
express the differences. Hence the musical epic is relatively 
somewhat short, and yet in an unrivaled way it has the epic 
quality of being able to go on as long as necessary, since one 
can always have it begin from the beginning and listen to it 
again and again, simply because the universal is expressed and 
is expressed in the concretion of immediacy. Here one does 
not hear Don Giovanni as a particular individual; one does not 
hear what he says but hears his voice, the voice of the sen- 
suous, and hears it through the longings of femininity. Don 
Giovanni can become epic only by continually finishing and 
continually being able to begin all over again, for his life is the 
sum of repellerende moments [Momenter]*° that have no coher- 
ence, and his life as the moment is the sum of moments and as 
the sum of moments is the moment. Don Giovanni lies within 
this universality, in this hovering between being an individual 
and a force of nature; as soon as he becomes an individual, the 
esthetic acquires completely different categories. 

That is why it is quite in order and has deep inner signifi- 
cance that in the seduction that occurs in the play, Zerlina’s se- 
duction, the girl is an ordinary peasant girl. Pseudo-estheti- 
cians, who, pretending to understand poets and composers, 
contribute everything to a misunderstanding of them, will 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 97 


perhaps inform us that Zerlina is an unusual girl. Anyone who 
believes this shows that he has totally misunderstood Mozart 
and that he is using incorrect categories. That he misunder- 
stands Mozart is certainly clear, for Mozart has purposely kept 
Zerlina as insignificant as possible, which Hotho%’ also is 
aware of, without, however, perceiving the basic reason. If 
Don Giovanni's love had been qualified otherwise than as sen- 
suous, if he had been a seducer in the intellectual-spiritual 
sense—something we shall consider later—then it would have 
been a basic defect in the piece to have the heroine be a little 
peasant girl in the seduction that engages us dramatically in the 
play. In that case, the esthetic would demand that he be given 
a more difficult task. But for Don Giovanni these differences 
do not apply. IfI may imagine that he would speak about him- 
self in this way, he would perhaps say, ““You are mistaken. I 
am no husband who needs an unusual girl to make me happy; 
every girl has what makes me happy, and therefore I take them 
all.” That is how the words I touched on earlier must be under- 
stood: even coquettes as old as sixty—or in another place: pur 
ché porti la gonella, voi sapete quel ché fa [if she just wears a skirt, 
you know well enough what he does].°® For Don Giovanni, 
every girl is an ordinary girl, every love affair a story of every- 
day life. Zerlina is young and beautiful, and she is a woman; 
this is the extraordinary that she shares with hundreds of 
others. But it is not the extraordinary that Don Giovanni de- 
sires, but the ordinary that she shares with every woman. If 
this is not the case, then Don Giovanni ceases to be absolutely 
musical; then the esthetic demands words, lines, whereas now, 
since it is the case, Don Giovanni is absolutely musical. 

I would like to illuminate the inner structure of the piece 
from another side as well. Elvira is a dangerous enemy to Don 
Giovanni. This is frequently emphasized in the lines by the 
Danish translator.°? Certainly it is a mistake for Don Giovanni 
to have lines to speak, but it does not follow from this that 
there should not be a single good comment among them. So 
Don Giovanni is afraid of Elvira. Presumably some esthetician 
would give a thorough explanation of this by coming up with 
a long rigmarole about Elvira as an extraordinary girl etc. This 


78 


79 


98 Either/Or, I 


misses the point completely. She is dangerous to him because 
she has been seduced. In the same way, in entirely the same 
way, Zerlina is dangerous to him when she has been seduced. 
As soon as she has been seduced, she is raised to a higher 
sphere; she has a consciousness that Don Giovanni lacks. That 
is why she is dangerous to him. This, again, is not because of 
the accidental but because of the universal. 

So Don Giovanni is a seducer; his eroticism is seduction. 
This no doubt says very much when it is understood properly, 
but very little when it is interpreted with a certain customary 
vagueness. We have already seen that with respect to Don Gio- 
vanni the concept of a seducer is essentially modified, since the 
object of his desire is the sensuous and this alone. This was im- 
portant in order to display the musical in Don Giovanni. In an- 
tiquity, the sensuous found its expression in the mute stillness 
of sculpture; in the Christian world, the sensuous had to burst 
out in all its impatient passion. Although it can thus be truly 
said that Don Giovanni is a seducer, this term, which can easily 
confuse the weak brains of some estheticians, frequently gives 
occasion for misunderstanding when some random comments 
that could be said about such a person and have been scraped 
together then are automatically transferred to Don Giovanni. 
At times, by tracking*down Don Giovanni's cunning, they 
have exposed their own to the light of day; at times they have 
talked themselves hoarse explaining his machinations and in- 
genuity—in short, the word “‘seducer” has prompted every- 
one to deal with him as best he could and to contribute his bit 
to a total misunderstanding. 

Provided that it is more urgent for one to say something 
correct than to say anything whatsoever, one must apply the 
word “‘seducer” to Don Giovanni very cautiously. This is not 
because Don Giovanni is so perfect, but because he does not 
fall within ethical categories at all. Therefore, I would rather 
call him a deceiver, since there is always something more am- 
biguous in that term. To be a seducer always takes a certain re- 
flection and consciousness, and as soon as this is present, it can 
be appropriate to speak of craftiness and machinations and 
subtle wiles.© Don Giovanni lacks this consciousness. There- 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 99 


fore, he does not seduce. He desires, and this desire acts seduc- 
tively. To this extent he does seduce. He enjoys the satisfaction 
of desire; as soon as he has enjoyed it, he seeks a new object, 
and so it goes on indefinitely. Thus he does indeed deceive, but 
still not in such a way that he plans his deception in advance; it 
is the power of the sensuous itself that deceives the seduced, 
and it is rather a kind of nemesis.®! He desires and continually 
goes on desiring and continually enjoys the satisfaction of de- 
sire. He lacks the time to be a seducer, the time beforehand in 
which to lay his plan and the time afterward in which to be- 
come conscious of his act. A seducer, therefore, ought to pos- 
sess a power that Don Giovanni does not have, however well 
equipped he is otherwise: the power of words. As soon as we 
give him the power of words, he ceases to be musical, and the 
esthetic interest becomes a different one. 

Achim v. Arnim tells somewhere® of a seducer with an en- 
tirely different style, a seducer who falls within ethical cate- 
gories. Arnim describes him with words that in their truthful- 
ness, boldness, and pithiness are almost a match for a stroke of 
the bow by Mozart. He declares that he could speak with a 
woman in such a way that if the devil grabbed him he would 
talk himself free if he could manage to speak with his dam. 
This is the genuine seducer; the esthetic interest here is also 
something else: namely, the how, the method.© Therefore 
there is something very profound (perhaps most people have 
not noticed it) in the fact that Faust, who reproduces Don Juan, 
seduces only one girl, whereas Don Giovanni seduces by the 
hundreds; but in intensity this one girl is seduced and de- 
stroyed in an entirely different way than all those Don Gio- 
vanni deceived—precisely because Faust as a reproduction has 
an intellectual-spiritual quality. The power of a seducer like 
that is speech: that is, the lie. A few days ago, I heard a soldier 
speaking with another soldier about a third one who had de- 
ceived a girl; he did not describe it in detail, and yet his expres- 
sion was excellent: “He knew how to do it with lies and ail 
that.”” Such a seducer is of a kind entirely different from Don 
Giovanni, differs from him essentially, which can also be seen 
in this, that he and his activities are extremely unmusical and 


80 


100 Either/Or, I 


esthetically fall within the category of the interesting.** There- 
fore, from the properly esthetic point of view, the object of his 
desire is also something more than the merely sensuous. 

But what kind of power is it, then, by which Don Giovanni 
seduces? It is the energy of desire, the energy of sensuous de- 
sire. He desires total femininity in every woman, and therein 
lies the sensuous, idealizing force with which he simultane- 
ously enhances and overcomes his prey. The reflection of this 
immense passion enhances and develops the desired one, who 
blushes in heightened beauty because of its reflection. Just as 
the fire of the enthusiast envelops with a seductive luster even 
those uninvolved persons who have some relation to him, so 
in a far deeper sense he transfigures every girl, since his rela- 
tion to her is an essential relation. This is why all the finite dif+ 
ferences vanish for him in comparison with the main point: to 
be a woman. The old ones he rejuvenates into the beautiful 
middle age of womanhood; the child he almost matures in an 
instant; everything that is woman is his prey (pur ché porti la go- 
nella, voi sapete quel ché fa). But this must not be understood as 
if his sensuousness were blindness; instinctively he knows 
very well how to make distinctions, and, above all, he ideal- 
izes. If | think back momentarily to a preceding stage, to the 
Page, the reader will perhaps recall that already in speaking of 
him I compared a remark by the Page with a remark by Don 
Giovanni. I have the mythical Page remain; I have the actual 
one join the army. If | now were to imagine that the mythical 
Page had extricated himself and had begun to move, I would 
call to mind here a comment by the Page that applies to Don 
Giovanni. When Cherubino, light as a bird, boldly leaps 
through the window, it affects Susanna so powerfully that she 
nearly faints, and when she has recovered she cries out, “‘See 
how he runs—oh, won’t he be a success with the girls!’ This 
is entirely appropriate for Susanna to say, and the reason for 
her fainting is not simply the performance of the bold leap but 
rather that he has already been a success with her. In fact, the 
Page is the eventual Don Giovanni, although this must not be 
ludicrously construed, as if by growing older the Page became 
Don Giovanni. Now, Don Giovanni not only is a success with 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 101 


the girls, but he makes the girls happy—and unhappy—yet 
strangely enough in such a way that that is what they want, 
and it would be a poor sort of girl who would not wish to be- 
come unhappy in order to have been happy once with Don 
Giovanni. 

Therefore, even if I go on calling Don Giovanni a seducer, I 
nevertheless do not at all think of him slyly laying his plans, 
subtly calculating the effect of his intrigues; that by which he 
deceives is the sensuous in its elemental originality, of which 
he is, as it were, the incarnation. Shrewd levelheadedness is 
lacking in him; his life is sparkling like the wine with which he 
fortifies himself; his life is turbulent like the melodies that ac- 
company his joyous repast; he is always jubilant. He needs no 
preparation, no plan, no time, for he is always ready; that is, 
the power is always in him, and the desire also, and only when 
he desires is he properly in his element. He sits down to dinner; 
happy as a god he flourishes his goblet—he rises with the nap- 
kin in his hand, ready for the attack. If Leporello awakens him 
in the middle of the night, he always wakes up sure of his vic- 
tory. But this power, this force, cannot be expressed in words; 
only music can give us a notion of it; for reflection and thought 
it is inexpressible. The craftiness of an ethically defined se- 
ducer I can clearly put into words, and music would venture 
in vain to carry out this task. With Don Giovanni, it is the op- 
posite. What kind of power is it? No one can say. Even if I 
asked Zerlina about it before she goes to the ball: By what 
power does he enthrall you?—she would answer: No one 
knows. And I would say: Well spoken, my child! You speak 
more wisely than the wise men of India; richtig, das weisz man 
nicht [correct, no one knows that], and the trouble is that I can- 
not explain it, either. 

This power in Don Giovanni, this omnipotence, this life, 
only music can express, and I know no other predicate to de- 
scribe it than: it is exuberant gaiety. Thus when Kruse has Don 
Giovanni, as he comes onstage at Zerlina’s wedding, say, 
“Cheer up, children! You are indeed all dressed as for a wed- 
ding,’ he is saying something entirely appropriate and also 
something more than he perhaps thinks. Indeed, he himself 


102 Either/Or, I 


brings the gaiety with him, and as for the wedding, it is not 
without significance that they are all dressed as for a wedding, 
because Don Giovanni is the groom not only for Zerlina, but 
he celebrates with games and songs the wedding of the young 
girls in the whole parish. No wonder that they flock about 
him, the happy maidens. Nor are they disappointed, for he has 
enough for all. Flattery, sighs, bold glances, tender hand- 
clasps, secret whispers, the dangerous closeness, the tempting 
distance—and yet these are only the lesser mysteries, prenup- 
tial gifts. It is a delight for Don Giovanni to survey such a rich 
harvest; he takes care of the whole parish, and yet it perhaps 
does not take him as long a time as Leporello spends at the of- 
fice. 

All this discussion leads again to the real subject of this in- 
vestigation, that Don Giovanni is absolutely musical. He de- 
sires sensuously; he seduces with the demonic power of the 
sensuous; he seduces all. Words, lines, are not suitable for him, 
for then he immediately becomes a reflective individual. He 
does not have that kind of continuance at all but hurries on in 
an eternal vanishing, just like the music, which is over as soon 
as the sound has stopped and comes into existence again only 
when it sounds once again. 

Therefore, if I were to raise the question of Don Giovanni's 
appearance, is he handsome, young or old, approximately 
how old, then it would only be a concession from my side and 
what can be said about it can expect to find a place here in the 
same way a tolerated sect finds a place in the state church. 
Handsome he is, not exactly young; if I were to suggest his 
age, I would suggest thirty-three years, which is the age of a 
generation. The dubiousness of becoming involved in such in- 
vestigations is that one easily loses the totality in dwelling on 
the particular, as if Don Giovanni seduced with his handsome- 
ness or anything else that could be mentioned; then one sees 
him but no longer hears him, and thereby he is lost. So if I, 
trying to do my part to help the reader gain a picture of Don 
Giovanni, were to say: See, there he stands! See how his eyes 
flame; he smiles triumphantly, so sure is he of his conquest. 
See his royal countenance, claiming that which is Caesar’s.” 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 103 


See how lightly he steps in the dance, how proudly he offers 
his hand. Who is the lucky one to whom it is offered? Or if I 
were to say: Look, there he stands in the forest shadows; he is 
leaning against a tree and accompanies himself on a guitar, and 
look, over there among the trees a young maiden is disappear- 
ing, alarmed like a startled wild deer. But he is in no hurry; he 
knows that she is seeking him. Or if I were to say: There he 
rests on the lake shore in the luminous night, so handsome that 
the moon stands still and relives the love affair of its youth,® 
so handsome that the young maidens of the town would give 
everything in daring to sneak over and make use of a moment 
of darkness to kiss him while the moon is rising again to shine 
in the heavens—if I did that, the alert reader would say: See 
here, there he has spoiled everything for himself; he himself 
has forgotten that Don Giovanni is not to be seen but is to be 
heard. Therefore I do not do that but say: Listen to Don Gio- 
vanni—that is, if you cannot get an idea of Don Giovanni by 
hearing him, then you never will. Listen to the beginning of 
his life; just as the lightning is discharged from the darkness of 
the thunderclouds, so he bursts out of the abyss of earnestness, 
swifter than the lightning’s flash, more capricious than light- 
ning and yet just as measured. Hear how he plunges down into 
the multiplicity of life, how he breaks against its solid em- 
bankment. Hear these light, dancing violin notes, hear the in- 
timation of joy, hear the jubilation of delight, hear the festive 
bliss of enjoyment. Hear his wild flight; he speeds past him- 
self, ever faster, never pausing. Hear the unrestrained craving 
of passion, hear the sighing of erotic love, hear the whisper of 
temptation, hear the vortex of seduction, hear the stillness of 
the moment—hear, hear, hear Mozart’s Don Giovanni. 


2. Other Versions of Don Juan Considered 
in Relation to the Musical Interpretation 


It is common knowledge that the idea of Faust has been the 
subject of numerous interpretations, but this is by no means 
the case with Don Juan. This might seem strange, all the more 
so since the second idea characterizes a far more universal pe- 
riod in the development of individual life than the first. But the 


84 


85 


104 Either/Or, I 


ready explanation of this is that the Faustian idea presupposes 
a kind of intellectual-spiritual maturity, which much more 
naturally lends itself to interpretation. Besides that, as I have 
pointed out above with respect to the fact that there does not 
exist a legend of that kind about Don Juan, people obscurely 
felt the difficulty with respect to the medium until Mozart dis- 
covered the medium and the idea. From that moment on, the 
idea first gained its deserved position and in turn has more than 
ever filled a span of years in individual life, but so satisfyingly 
that the urge to condense poetically what was experienced in 
fantasy did not become a poetic necessity. This in turn is an in- 
direct demonstration of the absolutely classic rank of the Mo- 
zart opera. The ideal along this line had already found its per- 
fect artistic expression to such a degree that it could indeed be 
tempting, but not tempting to poetic productivity. 

Mozart’s music certainly has been tempting, for where is the 
young man who has not had a moment in his life when he 
would have given half his kingdom to be a Don Juan, or per- 
haps all of it, when he would have given half his lifetime for 
one year of being Don Juan, or perhaps his whole life? But that 
was as far as it went. The more profound natures, who were 
moved by the idea, found everything, even the softest breeze, 
expressed in Mozart’s music; in its grandiose passion, they 
found a full-toned expression for what stirred in their own in- 
ner beings, they perceived how every mood strained toward 
that music just as the brook hurries on in order to lose itself in 
the infinitude of the sea. These natures found just as much text 
as commentary in the Mozartian Don Juan, and thus as they 
glided onward and downward in its music and relished the joy 
of losing themselves in this way, they also acquired the riches 
of admiration. The Mozartian music was in no respect too nar- 
row; on the contrary, their own moods were expanded, took 
on a preternatural magnitude when they rediscovered them in 
Mozart. The lower natures, who have no intimation of the in- 
finite, perceive no infinitude. The bunglers, who think them- 
selves a Don Juan because they have pinched a peasant girl’s 
cheek, put their arms around a waitress, or made a young girl 
blush, of course understand neither the idea nor Mozart, or 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 105 


how to produce a Don Juan themselves, except as a ludicrous 
freak, a family idol, who perhaps to the misty, sentimental 
eyes of some cousins would seem to be a true Don Juan, the 
epitome of all charm. In this sense, Faust has not as yet found 
an expression and, as noted above, never can, inasmuch as the 
idea is much more concrete. An interpretation of Faust can 
merit being called perfect, and yet a later generation will give 
rise to a new Faust, whereas Don Juan, because of the abstract 
character of the idea, lives on forever, in every age, and to wish 
to produce a Don Juan after Mozart will always be like want- 
ing to write an Ilias post Homerum [Iliad after Homer] in a sense 
even more profound than is the case with Homer. 

Now even if what has been developed here is correct, it by 
no means thereby follows that a particular gifted nature should 
not have attempted to interpret Don Juan in some other way. 
Everyone knows this, but not everyone may have noticed that 
the model for all other interpretations is essentially Moliére’s 
Don Juan;® but this, in turn, is much older than Mozart’s and 
is also comic, and in relation to Mozart’s Don Giovanni is like 
a fairy tale in Muszeus’s” interpretation in relation to a version 
by Tieck.”! Therefore, I can in fact limit myself to a discussion 
of Moliére’s Don Juan, and as I try to make an esthetic assess- 
ment of it, I shall indirectly be assessing the other interpreta- 
tions. But I make an exception of Heiberg’s Don Juan.”? He 
himself declares in the title that it is “modeled partly on Mo- 
liére.” This is indeed entirely true, but nevertheless Heiberg’s 
play has a great advantage over Moliére’s. This no doubt is due 
to the sure esthetic eye with which Heiberg always compre- 
hends his task, the taste with which he knows how to discrim- 
inate, but in the present instance it is still not impossible that 
Prof. Heiberg was indirectly influenced by Mozart’s interpre- 
tation to see—namely, how Don Juan must be interpreted as 
soon as music is not made its proper expression or he is placed 
in completely different esthetic categories. Professor Hauch 
has also produced a Don Juan” that is on the verge of falling 
within the category of the interesting. Therefore, as I go on to 
discuss the other group of versions of Don Juan, I presumably 
need not point out to the reader that this is done not for their 


86 


87 


106 Either/Or, I 


own Sake in the present little exploration but only in order to 
illuminate the significance of the musical interpretation more 
fully than was possible in the previous discussion. 

The turning point in the interpretation of Don Juan has al- 
ready been designated above in this way: as soon as he is given 
spoken lines, everything is changed. That is, the reflection that 
motivates the lines reflects him out of the vagueness in which 
he is only musically audible. This being so, it might seem that 
Don Juan could be interpreted best as ballet.” It is indeed well 
known that he has been interpreted in this way. Yet this inter- 
pretation must be commended for having known its powers, 
and for this reason it has limited itself to the final scene, where 
the passion in Don Juan would be most readily visible in the 
pantomimic play of muscles. As a consequence, here again 
Don Juan is presented not in his essential passion but according 
to the accidental, and the poster advertising such a perform- 
ance always includes more than the play; that is, it says that it 
is Don Juan, the seducer Don Juan, whereas the ballet presents 
almost nothing more than the torments of despair, the expres- 
sion of which, since it has to be solely in pantomime, he shares 
with many others who are in despair. What is essential in Don 
Juan cannot be presented in ballet, and everyone readily feels 
how ludicrous it would be to watch Don Juan infatuating a girl 
by means of dance steps and ingenious gesticulations. Don 
Juan is an inner qualification and thus cannot become visible or 
appear in bodily configurations and movements or in molded 
harmony. 

Even if Don Juan is not given speaking lines, an interpreta- 
tion of Don Juan that nevertheless uses words as a medium is 
conceivable. And there actually is such an interpretation by 
Byron.” That Byron was in many ways particularly endowed 
to present a Don Juan is certain enough, and therefore one can 
be sure that when that undertaking failed, the reason was not 
in Byron but in something far deeper. Byron has ventured to 
bring Don Juan into existence for us, to tell us of his childhood 
and youth, to construct him out of the context of his finite life- 
relationships. But Don Juan thereby became a reflective per- 
sonality who loses the ideality he has in the traditional picture. 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 107 


I shall quickly explain here the change that takes place in the 
idea. When Don Juan is interpreted musically, I hear in him the 
total infinitude of passion, but also its infinite power that noth- 
ing can resist; I hear the wild craving of desire, but also the ab- 
solute victoriousness of this desire, against which any at- 
tempted opposition would be ineffectual. If thought dwells 
just once on the obstruction, then it is more likely to gain im- 
portance just by inciting passion than by actually creating op- 
position; the pleasure is increased, the victory is certain, and 
the obstruction is only a stimulation. In Don Juan, I have such 
a rudimentarily stirred life, demonically powerful and irresist- 
ible. This is his ideality, and this I can enjoy undisturbed, be- 
cause to me music presents him not as a person or individual 
but as a power. If Don Juan is interpreted as an individual, then 
he is eo ipso in conflict with the world about him. As an indi- 
vidual, he feels the constraint and the fetters of these surround- 
ings; as a great individual he may triumph over them, but one 
immediately feels that the difficulties of the obstructions play 
a different role here. The interest is preoccupied essentially 
with them. But Don Juan is thereby drawn under the rubric of 
the interesting. If by means of turgid words he were to be pre- 
sented here as absolutely victorious, one would promptly feel 
this to be unsatisfactory, since it does not belong to an individ- 
ual as such to be victorious, and one demands the crisis of con- 
flict. 

The opposition that the individual must combat can in part 
be something external that is not so much in the object of at- 
tention as in the surrounding world; it can in part be in the ob- 
ject itself. The first has been the preoccupation of nearly all the 
interpretations of Don Juan because they have clung to the ele- 
ment of the idea that as an erotic he must be triumphant. If, on 
the other hand, the other side is stressed, only then, I believe, 
is there any prospect of a significant interpretation of Don Juan 
that would form a counterpart to the musical Don Juan, 
whereas any interpretation of Don Juan that lies between these 
would always have imperfections. In the musical Don Juan, 
there would then be the extensive seducer; in the other, the in- 
tensive. So the latter Don Juan is not presented as possessing 


88 


108 Either/Or, I 


his object with one single blow—he is not the immediately 
qualified seducer; he is the reflective seducer.”° That which oc- 
cupies us here is the subtlety, the cunning, whereby he knows 
how to steal into a girl’s heart, the dominion he knows how to 
gain over it, the enthralling, deliberate, progressive seduction. 
How many he has seduced is of no importance here; what oc- 
cupies us is the artistry, the meticulousness, the profound cun- 
ning with which he seduces. Ultimately the enjoyment itself 
becomes so reflective that by comparison it becomes quite dif- 
ferent from the musical Don Juan’s enjoyment. The musical 
Don Juan enjoys the satisfaction; the reflective Don Juan en- 
joys the deception, enjoys the craftiness. The immediate pleas- 
ure is past, and reflection on the enjoyment is enjoyed more. 
In this respect, there is a little hint in Moliére’s interpretation, 
except that this can by no means be developed, because all the 
remainder of the interpretation is a hindrance. Don Juan’s de- 
sire is aroused because he sees a girl happy in her relation to the 
one she loves; he begins to be jealous. This is an interest that in 
the opera would not occupy us at all, simply because Don Juan 
is not a reflective individual. As soon as Don Juan is inter- 
preted as a reflective individual, an ideality corresponding to 
the musical ideality can be attained only when the matter is 
shifted into the psychological realm. What is achieved, then, is 
the ideality of intensity. Therefore, Byron’s Don Juan must be 
regarded as a failure because it stretches out epically. The im- 
mediate Don Juan must seduce 1,003; the reflective Don Juan 
needs to seduce only one, and how he does it is what occupies 
us. The reflective Don Juan’s seduction is a tour de force in 
which every particular little episode has its special significance; 
the musical Don Juan’s seduction is a turn of the hand, a matter 
of a moment, more quickly done than said. It reminds me of a 
tableau I once saw. A handsome young man, a real ladies’ 
man. He was playing with some young girls, all of them at 
that dangerous age when they are neither adults nor children. 
Among other things, they amused themselves by jumping 
over a ditch. He stood at the edge and helped them jump by 
taking them around the waist, lifting them lightly into the air, 
and setting them down on the other side. It was a charming 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 109 


picture; I delighted in him as much as in the young girls. Then 
I thought of Don Juan. They themselves run into his arms, 
these young girls; then he seizes them, and just as quickly, just 
as nimbly sets them down on the other side of the ditch of life. 

The musical Don Juan is altogether victorious and there- 
fore, of course, is also in complete possession of every means 
that can lead to this victory, or, more correctly, he is in such 
complete possession of the means that it seems as if he did not 
need to use them—that is, he does not use them as means. As 
soon as he becomes a reflective individual, it is apparent that 
there is something called means. If the poet now gives them to 
him but along with them makes the opposition and the ob- 
struction so alarming that the victory becomes doubtful, Don 
Juan then falls under the rubric of the interesting, and in this 
respect many interpretations of Don Juan are imaginable, until 
one reaches what we previously called intensive seduction. If 
the poet denies him the means, the interpretation falls under 
the rubric of the comic. 

A consummate interpretation that has drawn him under the 
rubric of the interesting, I have not seen; it holds true, how- 
ever, of most versions of Don Juan that they approach the 
comic. This is easily explained by their attachment to Moliére, 
in whose interpretation the comic is dormant, and it is to Hei- 
berg’s credit that he was clearly aware of this and therefore not 
only calls his play a marionette show but in so many other 
ways has the comic shine forth. As soon as a passion, in being 
depicted, is denied the means to its satisfaction, either a tragic 
or a comic turn will be produced. A tragic turn cannot very 
well be produced when the idea is perceived to be wholly un- 
justified, and therefore the comic is so close at hand. If I por- 
tray an individual with a passion for gambling and then give 
him five rix-dollars to gamble away, the turn would be comic. 
This does not entirely apply to Moliére’s Don Juan, but still 
there is a similarity. If 1 have Don Juan be financially embar- 
rassed, plagued by creditors, he promptly loses the ideality he 
has in the opera, and the effect becomes comic. The famous 
comic scene in Moliére,”” which as a comic scene is very good 
and is also very appropriate in his comedy, should, of course, 


89 


110 Either/Or, I 


never be included in the opera, where it has a totally disturbing 
effect. 

That Moliére’s version aims at the comic is apparent not 
only in the comic scene just mentioned, which, if it were com- 
pletely isolated, would prove nothing, but in the whole de- 
sign, which bears the imprint of it. Sganarelle’s first and last 
lines, the beginning and the end of the whole play, more than 
adequately testify to this. Sganarelle begins with a eulogy ona 
pinch of snuff, from which one sees, among other things, that 
he must not be so very busy in this Don Juan’s service; he ends 
by complaining that he is the only one who has been wronged. 
If one considers that Moliére also has the statue come and fetch 
Don Juan and that he, although Sganarelle also has been a wit- 
ness to this dreadful thing, puts these words into his mouth as 
if he were saying that the statue, since, incidentally, it devoted 
itself to practicing justice on earth and punishing vice, also 
ought to have been ready to pay Sganarelle the wages due him 
for long and faithful service to Don Juan, which his master, be- 
cause of his sudden departure, did not find himself in a posi- 
tion to do—if one considers this, one will sense the comic in 
Moliére’s Don Juan.’® (Heiberg’s version, which has the great 
advantage over Moliére’s of being more correct, has also in 
many ways produced a comic effect by putting a random kind 
of learning into Sganarelle’s mouth, which makes us see in 
him a prattling charlatan who after attempting many things 
ends up as Don Juan’s servant.) The hero in the piece, Don 
Juan, is anything but a hero; he is a hapless fellow who prob- 
ably failed his examinations and now has chosen another ca- 
reer. Indeed, we learn that he is a son of a very distinguished 
man who, with a conception of his forefather’s great name, 
moreover is trying to inspire him to virtue and immortal 
deeds,” but this is so unlikely in view of all his other behavior 
that one is inclined to think the whole thing a lie that Don Juan 
himself has invented. His conduct is not very chivalrous: we 
do not see him with sword in hand carving a path through 
life’s difficulties; now he gives this one a clout on the ear, now 
the next one—indeed, he as much as comes to blows with one 
girl’s fiancé.®° So if Moliére’s Don Juan really is a knight, the 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 111 


poet is very adept at making us forget it and strives therefore 
to have us see a rowdy, a common rake, who is not afraid to 
use his fists. Anyone who has had a chance to observe what we 
call a rake also knows that this class of men has a great prefer- 
ence for the sea. He will therefore also find it entirely appro- 
priate that Don Juan has caught sight of a couple of skirts and 
immediately sets after them in a boat from Kallebostrand,®! a 
Sunday adventure at sea, including the capsizing of the boat. 
Don Juan and Sganarelle are almost dispatched and at last are 
saved by Pedro and the tall Lucas,®* who at first were betting 
on whether it actually was human beings out there or a stone, 
a bet that costs Lucas one mark, eight shillings, which is al- 
most too much for Lucas and Don Juan. If one finds this en- 
tirely appropriate, the impression is shaken for a moment 
when we learn that Don Juan is also the fellow who has se- 
duced Elvira, murdered the Commander, etc., something one 
finds extremely unreasonable and that in turn must be ex- 
plained as a lie in order to bring about harmony. If Sganarelle 
is supposed to give us a notion of the passion raging in Don 
. Juan, then his expression is such a travesty that it is impossible 
to keep from laughing—for example, when Sganarelle tells 
Gusman that Don Juan, in order to obtain the one he wants, 
“would gladly marry her dog or cat—yes, even worse, marry 
you, too.’’®? Or when he makes the remark that his master is a 
disbeliever not only in love but also in medicine.™ 
Now, if Moliére’s interpretation of Don Juan, regarded as a 
comic version, were correct, I would not discuss it any fur- 
ther, since in this investigation I am dealing only with the ideal 
interpretation and the significance of music for it. I could then 
be satisfied with pointing out the noteworthy fact that only in 
music has Don Juan been interpreted ideally in the ideality he 
has in the Middle Age’s traditional conception. The lack of an 
ideal interpretation in the medium of language could then pro- 
vide an indirect proof for the legitimacy of my thesis. But here 
I can do more, precisely because Moliére is not correct, and 
what prevents him from being so is that he has retained some- 
thing of the ideal in Don Juan along the lines attributable to 
traditional conception. As I point out, it will again be apparent 


91 


92 


112 Either/Or, I 


that this can be expressed essentially only by music, and thus 
once again I come back to my original thesis. 

Right away in the first act of Moliére’s Don Juan, Sganarelle 
has a very long speech in which he attempts to give us a notion 
of his master’s unbounded passion and the multiplicity of his 
adventures. This speech parallels precisely the servant’s sec- 
ond aria in the opera. The speech produces only a comic effect, 
nothing more, and here again Heiberg’s version has the advan- 
tage in that the comic is less heterogeneous than in Moliére. 
This [speech], however, is an attempt to prompt in us an inti- 
mation of his power, but it is ineffective; only music can 
achieve this unity, because simultaneously with a description 
of Don Juan’s conduct, at the same time as the list is unrolled 
for us, it makes us hear the power of the seduction. 

In Moliére, the statue comes in the last act to fetch Don Juan. 
Even though the poet, by means of an advance warning, at- 
tempted to provide a motive for the statue’s stepping forth, 
this stone nevertheless is always a stumbling block from a dra- 
matic point of view. If Don Juan is ideally interpreted as 
power, as passion, then heaven itself must intervene. If not, it 
is always dubious to use such strong means. Indeed, the Com- 
mander did not need to inconvenience himself, since it is far 
more practicable for Mr. Paaske® to have Don Juan put into 
the debtor’s prison. This would be entirely in the spirit of 
modern comedy, which does not need such great powers in 
order to crush, simply because the moving powers themselves 
are not very grandiose. It would be quite modern to have Don 
Juan come to know the commonplace bounds of actuality. In 
the opera, it is entirely appropriate to have the Commendatore 
come again, but, after all, his conduct has ideal truth. The mu- 
sic immediately makes the Commendatore more than a partic- 
ular individual; his voice is enlarged to the voice of a spirit. 
Therefore, just as Don Juan in the opera is interpreted with es- 
thetic earnestness, so also is the Commendatore. In Moliére, 
he comes with an ethical solemnity and heaviness that make 
him almost ludicrous; in the opera, he comes with esthetic 
lightness and metaphysical truth. No power in the play, no 
power on earth, has been able to constrain Don Juan; only a 
spirit, an apparition, is able to do that. Understood correctly, 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 113 


this in turn will illuminate the interpretation of Don Juan. A 
spirit, an apparition, is reproduction;® this is the secret im- 
plicit in the coming again. But Don Juan is capable of every- 
thing, can withstand everything, except the reproduction of 
life, precisely because he is immediate, sensate life, of which 
spirit is the negation. 

Thus, Sganarelle, as interpreted by Moliére, becomes unex- 
plainable, a person with an extremely confused character. 
Once again, the disruptive element here is that Moliére has 
preserved something of the traditional. Since Don Juan on the 
whole is a power, this is also manifest in his relation to Lepo- 
rello. The latter feels drawn to him, overwhelmed by him, is 
assimilated by him, and becomes merely an organ for his mas- 
ter’s will. It is precisely this vague, opaque sympathy that 
makes Leporello a musical person, and it is entirely appropri- 
ate that he is not capable of detaching himself from Don Juan. 
It is another matter with Sganarelle. In Moliére, Don Juan is a 
particular individual, and consequently Sganarelle enters into 
a relation with him as an individual. Now, if Sganarelle feels 
indissolubly linked to him, it is no more than a reasonable es- 
thetic demand to insist on information about how this can be 
explained. It does not help that Moliére has him declare that he 
cannot detach himself from him, for the reader or spectator 
sees no reasonable basis for it, and whether there is a reasona- 
ble basis is precisely the issue here. Leporello’s inconstancy is 
well motivated in the opera, because in his relation to Don 
Juan he is closer to being an individual consciousness, and 
therefore the Don Juanian life is reflected differently in him, al- 
though he still is not really able to penetrate it. In Moliére, 
Sganarelle is also sometimes worse, sometimes better, than 
Don Juan, but it becomes incomprehensible that he does not 
leave him, since he does not even receive his wages. If anyone 
imagines a unity in Sganarelle comparable to the sympathetic 
musical vagueness Leporello has in the opera, there is no alter- 
native except to admit that this is biased foolishness. Here 
again is an example of how the musical must be featured in or- 
der that Don Juan can be interpreted in his true ideality. The 
defect in Moliére is not that he has interpreted him comically 
but that he has not been correct. 


94 


114 Either/Or, I 


Moliére’s Don Juan is also a seducer, but the piece gives us 
only a poor idea of it. That Elvira in Moliére’s play is Don 
Juan’s wife is without a doubt very appropriately designed 
with a view to the comic effect. It is immediately apparent that 
one is dealing with an ordinary person who uses promises of 
marriage to deceive a girl. Elvira thereby loses all the ideal 
stance she has in the opera, where she counters with no 
weapon other than that of offended womanhood, whereas 
here we imagine her with her marriage documents, and Don 
Juan loses the seductive ambiguity of being a young man and 
an experienced husband—that is, experienced in all ventures 
outside marriage. How he deceived Elvira, by what means he 
lured her out of the convent, all this we presumably are to 
learn from a few of Sganarelle’s lines, but since the seduction 
scene that occurs in the play does not give us an occasion to 
admire Don Juan’s art, confidence in those reports is naturally 
weakened. Insofar as Moliére’s Don Juan is comic, this was in- 
deed unnecessary; but since he himself still wants to have us 
understand that his Don Juan actually is the hero Don Juan, 
who has infatuated Elvira and murdered the Commander, the 
mistake in Moliére is readily apparent. Then, however, one is 
also made to reflect on whether this really was not due to the 
impossibility of portraying Don Juan as a seducer without the 
aid of music, unless, as noted above, one enters the psycholog- 
ical, which, again, cannot readily acquire dramatic interest. 
Furthermore, in Moliére, one does not hear him as he infat- 
uates the two young girls, Mathurine and Charlotte; the infa- 
tuation occurs offstage. Since here in turn Moliére has us con- 
jecture that Don Juan has given them promises of marriage, 
one again has only mediocre thoughts about his talent. To de- 
ceive a girl with a promise of marriage is a very inferior art, 
and because someone is small enough to do that, it certainly 
does not follow that he is great enough to be called Don Juan. 
The only scene that seems to be intended to depict Don Juan 
for us in his seductive, yet scarcely tempting, activity is the 
scene with Charlotte.*®’ But to tell a young peasant girl that she 
is beautiful, that she has sparkling eyes, to ask her to turn 
around so that one can look at her shape,®* does not betray 
anything extraordinary in Don Juan but betrays a lecherous 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 115 


fellow who looks at a young girl the way a trader looks at a 
horse. Admittedly the scene does have a comic effect, and if it 
was supposed to have only that, I would not discuss it here. 
But since this, his notorious venture, has no relation to the 
many affairs he must have had, this scene in turn contributes 
directly or indirectly to showing the imperfection of the com- 
edy. Moliére seems to have wanted to make something more 
of him, seems to have wanted to maintain the ideal in him, but 
he lacks the medium, and thus everything that actually occurs 
is rather insignificant. On the whole, it may be said that in 
Moliére’s Don Juan we come to know only historically that he 
is a seducer; it is not made visible dramatically. The scene in 
which he shows himself most active is the scene with Char- 
lotte and Mathurine,®? where he leads both of them on with talk 
and continually makes each one think that she is the one he has 
promised to marry. But what draws our interest here is not his 
seductive art but a very ordinary theatrical intrigue. 

In conclusion, I perhaps can illuminate what has been dis- 
cussed here with a comment frequently heard: that Moliére’s 
Don Juan is more moral than Mozart’s Don Giovanni. But pre- 
cisely this, properly understood, is high praise of the opera. In 
the opera, not only is there talk about a seducer, but Don Juan 
is a seducer, and it cannot be denied that in every detail the mu- 
sic often can be seductive enough. But so it ought to be, and 
this is precisely its greatness. Therefore, to say that the opera 
is immoral is fatuous and comes only from people who do not 
understand how to interpret a totality but are trapped by de- 
tails. The definitive aim of the opera is highly moral, and the 
impression it leaves is altogether beneficent, because every- 
thing is large-scale, everything has genuine, unadorned pa- 
thos, the passion of desire no less than the passion of earnest- 
ness, the passion of enjoyment no less than the passion of 
anger. 


3. The Inner Musical Construction 
of the Opera 


Although the heading of this section must be regarded as al- 
ready adequately enlightening, I nevertheless shall take the 
precaution of noting that it naturally is not my intention at all 


95 


96 


116 Either/Or, I 


to make an esthetic assessment of the piece Don Giovanni or to 
trace the dramatic structure of the text. One must always be 
careful about taking something apart in this way, especially if 
it is a classic production. I repeat again here what I have already 
frequently emphasized in the foregoing discussion—that Don 
Juan can be expressed only musically; this I myself have 
learned essentially through the music, and for this reason I 
ought to take care in every way lest it seem that the music 
lends a hand in an extraneous manner. If the matter is treated 
in that way, then for my part the music in this opera may be 
admired as much as one wishes—its absolute meaning has not 
been grasped. However talented Hotho’s exposition is other- 
wise, he has not kept himself free of this kind of false abstrac- 
tion, and therefore it cannot be regarded as satisfactory. His 
style, his exposition, and his reproduction are lively and stir- 
ring; his categories are indefinite and nebulous; his interpreta- 
tion of Don Giovanni is not permeated by one thought but is 
disintegrated into many. For him Don Giovanni is a seducer. 
But even this category is indefinite, and yet it must be specified 
in what sense he is that, as I have tried to do. Many things that 
are true in themselves are said about this seducer; but since 
general conceptions are permitted to be much too prevalent 
here, such a seducer readily becomes so reflective that he ceases 
to be absolutely musical. He goes through the piece scene by 
scene; his account is refreshingly leavened by his individuality, 
in a few places perhaps a bit too much. When this happens, 
there frequently follow sympathetic outpourings on how 
beautifully and richly and profusely Mozart has expressed all 
this. But this lyrical rapture over Mozart’s music is not 
enough, and however well it suits the man, and however 
beautifully he knows how to express himself, Mozart’s Don 
Giovanni is not acknowledged in its absolute validity by this 
interpretation. This acknowledgment is what I am striving 
for, because this acknowledgment is identical with the proper 
insight into what constitutes the subject of this investigation. 
Therefore, my aim is to make the subject of consideration not 
the whole opera but the opera in its totality, not to discuss the 
individual parts separately but as far as possible to incorporate 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 117 


them into the whole, to see them not as detached from the 
whole but integrated in it. 

In a drama, the main interest is naturally concentrated on 
what is called the hero of the piece; in relation to him, the other 
characters take on only subordinate and relative importance. 
But the more the inward reflection in the drama permeates 
with its power of distinguishing, the more the subordinate 
characters also take on a kind of relative absoluteness, if I dare 
put it that way. This is not a defect at all but is rather a merit, 
just as the view of the world that can see only the few out- 
standing individuals and their importance in world develop- 
ment, but does not become aware of the subordinates, cer- 
tainly ranks higher in one sense but is lower than that which 
includes the lesser in its equally great validity. The dramatist 
will succeed in this only to the degree that nothing incommen- 
surable is left over, nothing of the mood from which the 
drama emerges, that is, nothing of the mood qua mood, but 
everything is converted into the dramatic sacred coin:™ action 
and situation. To the degree that the dramatist is successful in 
this, to the same degree the total impact left by his work will 
be less a mood than a thought, an idea. The more the total im- 
pact of a drama is a mood, the more sure one can be that the 
poet himself has had a presentiment of it as mood and has suc- 
cessively allowed it to come into existence from that and has 
not apprehended it in the idea and allowed this to unfold dra- 
matically. A drama of that kind suffers from an abnormal pre- 
ponderance of the lyrical. In a drama, this is a defect, but it is 
by no means a defect in an opera. The unity in an opera is pre- 
served by the dominant tone that sustains the whole. 

What has been said here about the total dramatic effect holds 
also for the separate parts of a drama. If I were to characterize 
in a single word the effect of the drama insofar as this differs 
from the effect of any other kind of literature, 1 would say: 
Drama works through the contemporaneous. In drama, I see 
the mutually isolated elements together in the situation, in the 
unity of action. The more isolated the distinct elements are, 
the more profoundly the dramatic situation is permeated by 
reflection, the less the dramatic unity will be a mood and the 


97 


98 


118 Either/Or, I 


more it will be a specific thought. But just as the totality of the 
opera cannot be permeated by reflection in a way found in 
drama proper, this is also the case with the musical situation, 
which admittedly is dramatic but nevertheless has its unity in 
the mood. The musical situation has the contemporaneous, as 
does every dramatic situation, but the effect of the forces is a 
consonance, a concord, a harmony, and the impact of the mu- 
sical situation is the unity produced by hearing together that 
which sounds together. The more the drama is permeated by 
reflection, the more the mood is transfigured into action. The 
more minor the action, the more predominant the lyrical ele- 
ment. In opera, this is altogether appropriate. Opera does not 
have so much character delineation and action as its immanent 
objective; it is not sufficiently reflective for that. On the other 
hand, unreflective, substantial passion finds its expression in 
opera. The musical situation is constituted by the unity of 
mood in the discrete plurality of voices [Stemmefleerhed]. This 
is precisely the distinctive characteristic of music—that it can 
maintain the plurality of voices in the unity of mood. Ordi- 
narily when we use the word “‘plurality,’’ we mean a unity that 
is the final result; in music such is not the case. 

The dramatic interest requires swift progress, a stirring 
tempo, what could be called the law of the immanental accel- 
eration of a falling object. The more the drama is imbued with 
reflection, the more unremittingly it hastens on. If, however, 
the lyrical or the epic element is unilaterally dominant, this ex- 
presses itself in a kind of anesthetizing that allows the situation 
to fall asleep and makes the dramatic process and progress 
sluggish and toilsome. The opera by nature does not have this 
urgency; it is characterized by a kind of tarrying, a kind of self- 
extension in time and space. This action does not have the 
speed of the fall or its direction but moves more horizontally. 
The mood is not sublimated in character and action. Conse- 
quently, the action in an opera can be only immediate action. 

If we apply all this to the opera Don Giovanni, it will give us 
occasion to see it in its true classic validity. Don Giovanni is 
the hero in the opera; the main interest is concentrated upon 
him; not only that, but he also endows all the other characters 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 119 


with interest. This must not, however, be taken in any exter- 
nal sense, for the very secret of this opera is that its hero is also 
the force in the other characters. Don Giovanni’s life is the life 
principle in them. His passion sets in motion the passion of the 
others. His passion resonates everywhere; it resonates in and 
supports the Commendatore’s earnestness, Elvira’s wrath, 
Anna’s hate, Ottavio’s pomposity, Zerlina’s anxiety, Mazet- 
to’s indignation, Leporello’s confusion. As the hero in the op- 
era, Don Giovanni is the denominator of the piece; as the hero 
gives the name to a piece, as is usually the case, but he is 
more—he is, if I may put it this way, the common denomi- 
nator. Compared with his life, the lives of all the others are 
only derived. If a dominant tone is required for an opera’s 
unity, it is easy to see that a more perfect subject for an opera 
than Don Juan is unthinkable. In relation to the forces in the 
play, the dominant tone can be a third force that sustains these. 
I cite The White Lady as an example of that kind of opera, but 
in relation to the opera, such a unity is an additional qualifica- 
tion of the lyrical. In Don Giovanni, the dominant tone is none 
other than the basic force in the opera itself; this is Don Gio- 
vanni, but then he, in turn—precisely because he is not char- 
acter but essential life—is absolutely musical. The other fig- 
ures in the opera are not characters, either, but essential 
passions, which are posited*! by Don Giovanni and to that ex- 
tent, in turn, become musical. In other words, just as Don 
Giovanni entwines everybody, so all of them entwine Don 
Giovanni; they are the external consequences that his life itself 
continually posits. It is this absolute centrality of Don Gio- 
vanni’s musical life in the opera that enables it to exercise an 
unequaled power of illusion, to carry one away into the life 
that is in the piece. Because of the ubiquity of the musical in 
this music, one can enjoy a single fragment of it and yet be car- 
ried away instantly; one arrives in the middle of the perform- 
ance and instantly one is in the heart of it, for this heart, which 
is Don Giovanni’s life, is everywhere. 

It is a common experience that to strain two senses at the 
same time is not pleasant, and thus it is often disruptive to have 
to use the eyes a great deal at the same time as the ears are being 


100 


120 Either/Or, I 


used. Therefore, one is inclined to shut the eyes when listening 
to music. This is more or less true of all music, and in sensu emi- 
nentiori [in an eminent sense] of Don Giovanni. As soon as the 
eyes are involved, the impression is disrupted, for the dramatic 
unity that presents itself to the eye is altogether subordinate 
and deficient in comparison with the musical unity that is 
heard simultaneously. My own experience has convinced me 
of this. I have sat close to the front;92 | have moved back more 
and more; I have sought a remote corner in the theater in order 
to be able to hide myself completely in this music. The better 
I understood it or thought I understood it, the further I moved 
away from it—not out of coldness but out of love, for it wants 
to be understood at a distance. There has been something 
strangely enigmatic about this in my life. There have been 
times when I would have given everything for a ticket; now I 
do not even need to pay one rix-dollar for a ticket. I stand out- 
side in the corridor; I lean against the partition that shuts me 
off from the spectators’ seats. Then it affects me most power- 
fully; it is a world by itself, separated from me; I can see noth- 
ing but am close enough to hear and yet so infinitely far away. 
Since the main characters in an opera do not need to be so 
permeated by reflection that they become transparent as char- 
acters, it also follows from this, as was emphasized earlier, that 
the situation cannot be perfectly developed or full-blown but 
to a certain degree is sustained by a mood. The same is true of 
the action in an opera. Action in the strict sense of the word, 
action undertaken with a consciousness of the goal, cannot be 
expressed in music, but what one could call immediate action 
certainly can. Both are the case in Don Giovanni. The action is 
immediate action; on this point may I refer to my earlier dis- 
cussion of the sense in which Don Giovanni is a seducer. 
Because the action is immediate action, it is also entirely ap- 
propriate that irony is so prevalent in this piece, for irony is 
and remains the disciplinarian of the immediate life.?&gt; To cite 
just one example, the Commendatore’s reappearance™ is enor- 
mously ironic, for Don Giovanni can surmount any obstruc- 
tion, but a ghost, as we all know, cannot be slain.” The situa- 
tion is sustained all the way through by the mood. On this 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 121 


point, may I recall Don Giovanni's significance for the whole 
opera and for the commensurate existence of the other char- 
acters in relation to him. 

I shall indicate what I mean by discussing a single situation 
in more detail. For that, I choose Elvira’s first aria.°° The or- 
chestra plays the overture; Elvira” enters. The passion raging 
in her breast must find release, and her song avails her. But, 
strictly speaking, this would be far too lyrical to be a situation; 
her aria then would be similar to the monologue in a drama. 
The only difference would be that the monologue comes clos- 
est to expressing the universal individually, the aria to express- 
ing the individual universally. But, to repeat, that would be 
too little for a situation. Therefore, the case is otherwise. In the 
background, we see Don Giovanni and Leporello in tense ex- 
pectation that the woman they have already seen at the win- 
dow will come forward. Now, if this were a drama, the situ- 
ation would not be composed of Elvira standing in the 
foreground and Don Giovanni in the background but would 
be composed of the unexpected encounter. The interest would 
center in the way Don Giovanni would escape from it. In the 
opera, the encounter also has its significance, but a very minor 
one. The encounter is to be seen; the musical situation is to be 
heard. The unity in the situation is the concordance in which 
Elvira and Don Giovanni sound simultaneously. Thus it is 
quite proper for Don Giovanni to keep himself in the back- 
ground as much as possible, for he should be unseen, not only 
by Elvira but also by the spectator. 

Elvira’s aria begins. I do not know how to describe her pas- 
sion other than as love’s hate, a mixed but nevertheless sono- 
rous, resonant passion. She is inwardly agitated; she has found 
release. She becomes faint for a moment in the way every pas- 
sionate outburst makes one weak—there is a pause in the mu- 
sic. But her inner agitation sufficiently indicates that her pas- 
sion still has not found adequate outlet; the diaphragm of 
wrath must be shaken even more powerfully. But what can 
evoke this tremor, what provocation? It can be only one thing: 
Don Giovanni’s mockery. Therefore Mozart has utilized the 
pause—would that I were a Greek, for then I would say he 


101 


102 


122 Either/Or, I 


used it quite divinely—to hurl in Giovanni’s mockery. Now 
her passion flames up more powerfully, explodes even more 
violently within her, and bursts forth in sound. This is re- 
peated once again; then her inner being trembles, then her 
wrath and pain burst forth like a stream of lava in the familiar 
run with which the aria ends. 

Here one sees what I mean when I say that Don Giovanni 
resonates in Elvira, that it is something more than a phrase. 
The spectator should not see Don Giovanni, should not see 
him together with Elvira in the unity of the situation; he 
should hear him in Elvira, through Elvira, for it is indeed Don 
Giovanni who is singing, but he sings in such a way that the 
more developed the spectator’s ear, the more it seems to him 
as if it came from Elvira herself. Indignation, just like love, 
creates its object. She is obsessed with Don Giovanni. This 
pause and Don Giovanni’s voice make the situation dramatic, 
but the unity in Elvira’s passion in which Don Giovanni reso- 
nates, while her passion is nevertheless posited by Don Gio- 
vanni, makes the situation musical.* 

Viewed as a musical situation, the situation is matchless. 
But if Don Giovanni is a character and Elvira equally so, the 
situation is a failure; it is wrong to have Elvira pouring out her 
heart” in the foreground and Don Giovanni mocking in the 


* In my opinion, Elvira’s aria and the situation ought to be interpreted as 
follows. Don Giovanni’s unparalleled irony ought not to be kept outside El- 
vira’s substantial passion but should be concealed in it. They must be heard 
together. *Just as the speculative eye sees things together, so the speculative 
ear hears things together. I will take an example from the purely physical 
world. When a person standing on a high point gazes out over a flat region and 
sees several roads running parallel to one another, he will, ifhe lacks intuition, 
see only the roads, and the fields between them will seem to disappear, or he 
will see only the fields, and the roads will disappear; however, he who has an 
intuitive eye will see them together, will see the whole section as striped. So 
also with the ear. What I have said here applies, of course, to the musical sit- 
uation; the dramatic situation has the added element that the spectator knows 
that it is Don Giovanni who is standing in the background and Elvira in the 
foreground. Now, if I assume that the spectator is aware of their earlier rela- 
tionship (something the spectator cannot know at first), the situation gains 
much, but one will also perceive that if the accent should fall here, then it 
would be wrong to keep them apart so long. 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 123 


background. Then it is required that I hear them together, yet 
without provision of the means for it, and although both of 
them are characters, they could not possibly harmonize that 
way. If they are characters, then the encounter is the situation. 

It was pointed out above that in opera the dramatic haste, 
the acceleration of the preliminary run, is not required as in 
drama, that here the situation may be enlarged upon a little. 
But at the same time this must not deteriorate into a continu- 
ous standstill. To give an example of the true middle course, I 
can underline the situation I just discussed, not as if it were the 
only one in Don Giovanni or the very best—on the contrary, 
they are all like this and all perfect—but because the reader has 
this one most clearly in mind. And yet I tread on dubious 
ground here, for I confess that there are two arias that must be 
left out; however perfect they are in themselves, they never- 
theless have a disruptive and delaying effect. I would just as 
soon keep this a secret, but it cannot be helped—the truth must 
come out. If they are removed, all the rest is just as perfect. 
The one is Ottavio’s, the other, Anna’s; both of them are more 
concert numbers than dramatic music, inasmuch as Ottavio 
and Anna on the whole have roles much too minor to dare to 
halt the movement. Remove them, and the rest of the opera 
has perfect musical-dramatic pace, perfect as no other is. 

It would be well worth the trouble to go through each par- 
ticular situation one by one, not to escort it with exclamation 
marks, but to show its significance, its validity as a musical sit- 
uation. But this lies outside the boundary of the present little 
inquiry. Here it was especially important to emphasize Don 
Giovanni’s centrality in the whole opera. Something similar 
recurs with respect to the particular situations. 

I would like to explain somewhat more explicitly the just- 
mentioned centrality of Don Giovanni in the opera by consid- 
ering the other characters in the piece in their relation to him. 
Just as in the solar system the dark bodies that receive their 
light from the central sun are always only half-luminous, that 
is, luminous on the side turned to the sun, so it is also with the 
characters in this piece. Only that part of life, the side that is 
turned toward Don Giovanni, is illuminated; otherwise they 


103 


124 Either/Or, I 


are obscure and opaque. This must not be taken in the narrow 
sense, as if each of these characters were some abstract passion, 
as if Anna, for example, were hate, Zerlina, irresponsibility. 
Such insipidity does not belong here at all. The passion in the 
individual is concrete, but concrete in itself, not concrete in the 
personality, or, to express myself more specifically, the rest of 
the personality is devoured by this passion. Now this is abso- 
lutely right, because it is an opera we are discussing. This ob- 
scurity, this partly sympathetic, partly antipathetic secret af- 
finity with Don Giovanni makes them all musical and makes 
the whole opera harmonize in Don Giovanni. The only char- 
acter in the piece who seems to constitute an exception is, of 
course, the Commendatore, but therefore it is also so sagely 
designed that he to some degree lies outside the piece or limits 
it. The more the Commendatore would be drawn to the fore- 
ground, the more the opera would cease to be absolutely mu- 
sical. Therefore, he is continually kept in the background and 
as nebulous as possible. The Commendatore is the vigorous 
antecedent clause and the outspoken consequent clause, be- 
tween which lies Don Giovanni’s intermediate clause, but the 
rich content of this intermediate clause is the substance of the 
opera. The Commendatore appears only two times. The first 
time it is night; it is in the background of the theater; we can- 
not see him, but we hear him fall before Don Giovanni’s ra- 
pier. Already at the very outset his earnestness, which is made 
all the more manifest by Don Giovanni's caricaturing mock- 
ery, something Mozart has superbly expressed in music—al- 
ready at the very outset his earnestness is too profound to be 
human; before he dies, he is spirit. The second time he appears 
as spirit, and the thundering voice of heaven sounds in his ear- 
nest, solemn voice. But just as he himself is transfigured, so his 
voice is transfigured into something more than a human voice; 
he no longer speaks, he passes judgment. 

Obviously the most important character in the piece, next 
to Don Giovanni, is Leporello. His relation to his master is in- 
telligible precisely through the music, unintelligible without 
it. If Don Giovanni is a reflective personality, then Leporello 
becomes almost an even greater knave than Giovanni is, and it 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 125 


becomes unintelligible that Don Giovanni can exercise so 
much power over him, and the only remaining motive is that 
he can pay him more than all the others, a motive that even 
Moliére does not seem to have wanted to use, since he allows 
Don Juan to be in financial straits. But if we hold fast to Don 
Giovanni as immediate life, then it is easy to understand that 
he can exercise a decisive influence on Leporello, that he assim- 
ilates him so that he can almost become an organ for Don Gio- 
vanni. In a certain sense, Leporello is closer to being a personal 
consciousness than Don Giovanni. In order to become that, 
however, he himself would have to clarify his relation to Don 
Giovanni; but he cannot do that, he cannot break the spell. 
Here again it holds true that as soon as Leporello has speaking 
lines he must become transparent to us. Furthermore, in Le- 
porello’s relation to Don Giovanni there is something erotic, 
there is a power with which he enthralls Leporello even against 
his will. But in this ambiguity he is musical, and Don Gio- 
vanni constantly resonates in him—something of which I shall 
later give an example to show that this is more than a phrase. 

With the exception of the Commendatore, all the characters 
stand in a kind of erotic relation to Don Giovanni. He cannot 
exercise any power over the Commendatore, who is con- 
sciousness; the others are in his power. Elvira loves him, and 
thereby she is in his power; Anna hates him, and thereby she is 
in his power; Zerlina fears him, and thereby she is in his 
power. Ottavio and Mazetto go along for the sake of kinship, 
for the ties of blood are tender. 

Looking back for a moment over what has been developed 
here, the reader will perhaps perceive how here again the re- 
lation of the idea of Don Juan to the musical has been devel- 
oped from many sides, how this relation is constitutive of the 
whole opera, how this is repeated in its several parts. 

I could very well stop here, but for the sake of greater com- 
pleteness I shall elucidate this relation by going through a few 
specific parts. The choice will not be arbitrary. I choose for 
this the overture, which certainly best gives the dominant tone 
of the opera in a compact concentration; I choose next the 
most epic and the most lyrical part in the piece in order to 


104 


I 
105 


126 Either/Or, I 


show how even in the outer limits the perfection of the opera 
is preserved, the musical-dramatic is sustained, how it is Don 
Giovanni who musically carries the opera. 

This is not the place to explain the overall importance the 
overture has for the opera; here it can only be emphasized that 
opera’s requirement of an overture demonstrates sufficiently 
the predominance of the lyrical, and that the intended effect is 
to evoke a mood, something that drama cannot get involved 
with, since everything there must be transparent. Therefore, 
it is appropriate that the overture is composed last so that the 
artist himself can be really saturated with the music. Hence, 
the overture generally provides a profound glimpse into the 
composer and his psychical relation to his music. If he fails to 
catch in it that which is central, if he does not have a more pro- 
found rapport with the basic mood of the opera, then this will 
unmistakably betray itself in the overture; then it becomes an 
assemblage of the salient points interlaced with a loose associ- 
ation of ideas but not the totality that contains, as it really 
should, the most penetrating elucidation of the content of the 
music. An overture of that sort is usually also very arbitrary, 
that is, it can be as long or as short as desired, and the cohesive 
element, the continuity (since it is no more than an association 
of ideas), can be spun out as long as desired. Therefore the 
overture frequently is a dangerous temptation for minor com- 
posers; that is, they are easily prompted to plagiarize them- 
selves, steal from their own pockets, which can have a very 
disruptive effect. Although it is obvious that the overture 
should not have the same content as the opera, it of course 
should not contain something altogether different. Indeed, it 
should have the same content as the opera, but in another way; 
it should contain it in a central way, and with the full power of 
what is central it should grip the listener. 

In this respect, the ever admired overture to Don Giovanni is 
and remains a perfect masterpiece, so if no other proof of the 
classic quality of Don Giovanni could be made, it would be suf- 
ficient to make this one point, the inconceivability that the one 
who had the center would not have the periphery also. This 
overture is no mingling together [Mellemhverandre™] of 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 127 


themes; it is not a labyrinthian interlacing of associations of 
ideas; it is concise, defined, strongly structured, and, above all, 
impregnated with the essence of the whole opera. It is pow- 
erful like a god’s idea, turbulent like a world’s life, harrowing 
in its earnestness, palpitating in its desire, crushing in its ter- 
rible wrath, animating in its full-blooded joy; it is hollow- 
toned in its judgment, shrill in its lust; it is ponderous, cere- 
monious in its awe-inspiring dignity; it is stirring, flaring, 
dancing in its delight. And this it has not attained by sucking 
the blood of the opera; on the contrary, it is rather a prophecy 
in its relation to the opera. In the overture, the music unfurls 
its total range; with a few powerful wing beats it soars above 
itself, as it were, floats above the place where it will descend. 
It is a struggle, but a struggle in the higher atmosphere. To 
anyone hearing the overture after he has become more familiar 
with the opera, it may seem as if he had penetrated the hidden 
workshop where the forces he has learned to identify in the op- 
era move with a primitive power, where they wrestle with one 
another with all their might. The contest, however, is too un- 
even; before the battle one force is already the victor. It flees 
and escapes, but this flight is precisely its passion, its burning 
restlessness in its brief joy of life, the pounding pulse in its pas- 
sionate ardor. It thereby sets the other force in motion and car- 
ries it along with itself. This, which at first seemed so unshak- 
ably firm that it was practically immovable, must now be off, 
and soon the movement is so swift that it seems like an actual 
conflict. 

To develop this any further is not feasible; here the point is 
to listen to the music, for this is not a conflict of words but an 
elemental fury. I must only call attention to what was dis- 
cussed earlier, that the interest of the opera is Don Giovanni, 
not Don Giovanni and the Commendatore—this is already ap- 
parent in the overture. Mozart seems to have deliberately de- 
signed it in such a way that the deep voice that rings out in the 
beginning gradually becomes weaker and weaker, almost 
loses, as it were, its majestic bearing, must hurry to keep pace 
with the demonic speed that evades it and yet almost attains 
the power to disgrace it by sweeping it into a race in the brev- 


107 


128 Either/Or, I 


ity of the moment. This gradually creates the transition to the 
opera itself. Consequently, the finale must be regarded as 
closely related to the first part of the overture. In the finale, the 
earnestness comes to itself again, whereas in the rogress of 
the overture it seemed to be beside itself. Now there is no 
question of running a race with lust; earnestness returns and 
thereby has cut off every way of escape to a new race. 

Therefore, although in one sense the overture is independ- 
ent, in another sense it is to be regarded as a running start to 
the opera. I have tried to point this out earlier by refreshing the 
reader’s recollection of the gradual weakening with which the 
one force approaches the beginning of the work. The same 
thing is manifest when one observes the other force—that is, it 
gradually increases; it begins in the overture, grows and in- 
creases. Particularly the beginning of it is admirably ex- 
pressed. We hear it so faintly, so cryptically suggested. We 
hear it, but it is over so swiftly that it seems as if we had heard 
something we had not heard. It requires an alert ear, an erotic 
ear, to notice the first time a hint is given in the overture of the 
light play of this desire that is so richly expressed later in all its 
lavish profusion. Since [am not a music expert, I cannot punc- 
tiliously designate this place; but I am writing, after all, only 
for lovers, and they presumably will understand me, some of 
them better than I understand myself. But I am content with 
my allotted share, with this enigmatic love affair, and al- 
though I otherwise thank the gods that I became a man and not 
a woman,'®! Mozart’s music has taught me that it is beautiful 
and refreshing and abundant to love as a woman loves. 

I am no friend of figures of speech; modern literature has 
made them very distasteful to me. It has gone almost so far 
that whenever I encounter a figure of speech, an involuntary 
fear comes over me that its true objective is to conceal an ob- 
scurity in the thought. Therefore I shall not risk an injudicious 
or futile attempt to translate the overture’s brisk and pithy 
brevity into a prolix and empty figurative language. I wish to 
emphasize only one point in the overture, and to draw the 
reader’s attention to it; I shall use a figure of speech—the only 
means I have to establish a connection with him. 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 129 


This point, of course, is none other than Don Giovanni's in- 
itial emergence, the presentiment of him and of the power 
with which he later breaks through. The overture begins with 
a few deep, earnest, even notes; then for the first time we hear 
infinitely far away an intimation that is nevertheless instantly 
recalled, as if it were premature, until later we hear again and 
again, bolder and bolder, more and more clamorous, that 
voice which at first subtly, demurely, and yet seemingly in 
anxiety, slipped in but could not press through. So it is in na- 
ture that one sometimes sees the horizon dark and clouded; too 
heavy to support itself, it rests upon the earth and hides every- 
thing in its obscure night; a few hollow sounds are heard, not 
yet in motion but like a deep mumbling to itself. Then in the 
most distant heavens, far off on the horizon, one sees a flash; it 
speeds away swiftly along the earth, is gone in an instant. But 
soon it appears again; it gathers strength; it momentarily illu- 
minates the entire heaven with its flame. The next second, the 
horizon seems even darker, but it flares up more swiftly, even 
more brilliantly; it seems as if the darkness itself has lost its 
composure and is starting to move. Just as the eye in this first 
flash has a presentiment of a great fire, so the ear has a presen- 
timent of the total passion in that dwindling stroke of the vi- 
olin bow. There is an anxiety in that flash; it is as if in that deep 
darkness it were born in anxiety—just so is Don Giovanni’s 
life. There is an anxiety in him, but this anxiety is his energy. 
In him, it is not a subjectively reflected anxiety; it is a 
substantial! anxiety. In the overture there is not what is com- 
monly called—without knowing what one is saying—despair. 
Don Giovanni’s life is not despair; it is, however, the full force 
of the sensuous, which is born in anxiety; and Don Giovanni 
himself is this anxiety, but this anxiety is precisely the de- 
monic zest for life. After Mozart has had Don Giovanni come 
into existence this way, his life now develops for us in the 
dancing strains of the violin, in which he lightly, fleetingly 
speeds on over the abyss. When one throws a pebble in such a 
way that it skims the surface of the water, it can for a time skip 
over the water in light hops, but it sinks down to the bottom 


108 


109 


130 Either/Or, I 


as soon as it stops skipping; in the same way he dances over the 
abyss, jubilating during his brief span. 

But if, as has been observed above, the overture can be re- 
garded as a running start to the opera, if in the overture one 
descends from that higher atmosphere, then the question is: at 
what point is it best for one to land in the opera, or how is the 
begining of the opera achieved? Here Mozart saw the only 
right thing to do: to begin with Leporello. It might seem that 
this is not so very meritorious, the more so because almost all 
the versions of Don Juan begin with a monologue by Sgana- 
relle. But there is a vast difference, and here again one has oc- 
casion to admire Mozart’s mastery. He has placed the first ser- 
vant-aria'®&gt; in immediate connection with the overture.!™ 
Leporello’s first aria is quite rightly reckoned as belonging to 
the overture. Leporello’s aria corresponds to the not uncele- 
brated monologue by Sganarelle in Moliére. We shall look 
more closely at the situation. Sganarelle’s monologue is far 
from unwitty, and when it is read in Prof. Heiberg’s light and 
flowing verse it is very diverting, but the situation itself is de- 
fective. I say this more especially with regard to Moliére, for 
in Heiberg it is another matter, and I say it not to censure Mo- 
liére but to show Mozart’s merit. A monologue is always 
more or less a break with the dramatic, and when the poet tries 
to produce an effect by the wittiness of the monologue rather 
than by its character, he has broken the rod on himself and has 
relinquished the dramatic interest. Not so in opera. Here the 
situation is absolutely musical. I have already pointed out the 
difference between a dramatic and a musical-dramatic situa- 
tion. In drama, chatter is not tolerated; action and situation are 
demanded. In opera there is repose in the situation. But then 
what makes this situation into a musical situation? It was em- 
phasized earlier that Leporello is a musical character, and yet it 
is not he who carries the situation. If that were so, his aria 
would be analogous to Sganarelle’s monologue, even though 
it would be just as certain that a quasi-situation like that is 
more suitable in opera than in drama. That which makes the 
situation musical is Don Giovanni, who is within. The center 
is not in Leporello, who approaches, but in Don Giovanni, 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 131 


whom we do not see—but whom we hear. Now, someone 
could very well object: But we do not hear Don Giovanni. To 
that I would answer: Indeed, we do, for he resonates in Lepo- 
rello. For that purpose, I call attention to the transition (vuol 
star dentro colla bella [you stay inside with the pretty lady]),!% in 
which Leporello is obviously reproducing Don Giovanni. But 
even if this were not the case, the situation nevertheless is so 
designed that one involuntarily gets Don Giovanni, too, that 
one forgets Leporello, who is standing outside, because of 
Don Giovanni, who is inside. On the whole, with real genius, 
Mozart has had Leporello reproduce Don Giovanni and 
thereby has achieved two things: the musical effect that when- 
ever Leporello is alone one hears Don Giovanni, and the pa- 
rodical effect that when Don Giovanni is present we hear Le- 
porello repeat him and thereby unconsciously parody him. I 
cite the end of the dance as an example of this. 

If one asks which part in the opera is the most epic, the an- 
swer is easy and indubitable: it is Leporello’s second aria, the 
list.!0° In a comparison of this aria with the corresponding 
monologue in Moliére’s version, it was pointed out earlier 
what absolute importance the music has, that precisely by let- 
ting us hear Don Giovanni, hear the variations in him, the mu- 
sic produces the effect that words or lines are unable to pro- 
duce. Here it is of importance to emphasize the situation and 
the musical in it. Now, if we look around the stage, we see the 
scenic ensemble consisting of Leporello, Elvira, and the faith- 
ful servant. The faithless lover, however, is not there; he is, as 
Leporello pointedly puts it, “Yes, he is gone.”!°” This is a vir- 
tuosity that Don Giovanni has: he is—and then he is gone— 
and he remains just as opportunely (for himself, that is) gone 
as a Jeronimus!® arrives opportunely. Since it is now obvious 
that he is gone, it might seem strange that I mention him and 
in a way bring him into the situation. On closer scrutiny, one 
perhaps will find it entirely appropriate and here see an exam- 
ple of how literally it must be understood that Don Giovanni 
is everywhere present in the opera, for this can hardly be more 
strongly expressed than by pointing out that even when he is 


110 


111 


132 Either/Or, I 


gone he is present. Now, however, we shall let him be gone, 
since later we shall see in what sense he is present. 

We shall, however, consider the three characters on the 
stage. The presence of Elvira is naturally instrumental in 
bringing about a situation; for it would not do to have Lepo- 
rello unroll the list for his own pastime, but her position is in- 
strumental in making the situation embarrassing. On the 
whole, it cannot be denied that sometimes the ridicule made of 
Elvira’s love is almost cruel. For example, in the second act, at 
the crucial moment when Ottavio finally has gathered courage 
in his heart and taken the rapier out of its sheath to murder 
Don Giovanni, she hurls herself between them and then dis- 
covers that it is not Don Giovanni but Leporello—a differen- 
tiation that Mozart has so powerfully expressed with a kind of 
plaintive bleat. In the situation at hand, there is likewise some- 
thing painful in her having to be present in order to know that 
in Spain there are 1,003, and indeed, worse yet, in the German 
version she is told that she herself is one of them.’ This is a 
German improvement that is just as foolishly improper as the 
German translation is ludicrously proper and utterly unsuc- 
cessful in a no less foolish way. It is for Elvira that Leporello 
makes an epic survey of his master’s life, and it cannot be de- 
nied that it is quite in order for Leporello to recite and Elvira 
to listen, because both of them are exceedingly interested in it. 

Therefore, just as we continually hear Don Giovanni in the 
whole aria, in certain places we hear Elvira, who is visibly 
present onstage as a witness instar omnium [worth them all], 
not because of any accidental privilege on her part but because, 
since the method essentially remains the same, what pertains 
to one pertains to all. If Leporello were a character or a person- 
ality permeated by reflection, it would be difficult to imagine 
such a monologue; but precisely because he is a musical figure 
who is absorbed in Don Giovanni, this aria has such great sig- 
nificance. It is a reproduction of Don Giovanni's e1itire lfe. 
Leporello is the epic narrator. Such a person certainly ought 
not to be cold or indifferent to what he is telling, but neverthe- 
less he ought to preserve an objective attitude toward it. This 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 133 


is not the case with Leporello. He is completely carried away 
by the life he is describing; he loses himself in Don Giovanni. 
So here I have another example of what it means to say that 
Don Giovanni resonates everywhere. Hence, the situation is 
not in Leporello and Elvira’s conversation about Don Gio- 
vanni but in the mood that carries the whole, in Don Gio- 
vanni’s invisible spiritual presence. To develop in greater de- 
tail the transition in this aria, how in the beginning it is quiet 
and less stirring but becomes more and more intense as Don 
Giovanni’s life resonates in it more and more, how Leporello 
is more and more swept away by it, wafted away and rocked 
by these erotic breezes, how it is variously nuanced accord- 
ingly as the diversity of femininity that lies within Don Gio- 
vanni’s range becomes audible in it—this is not the place for 
that. 

If one asks which part in the opera is the most lyrical, the 
answer is perhaps more doubtful, but it can scarcely be open 
to doubt that the most lyrical part can be accorded only to Don 
Giovanni, that it would be a violation of the dramatic subor- 
dination if a subsidiary character were permitted to occupy our 
attention in that way. Mozart has complied here, too. This 
narrows the choice considerably, and on closer scrutiny the 
contenders can be only the banquet,!!° the first part of the 
grand finale, or the familiar champagne aria.'!' As for the ban- 
quet scene, up to a point it may certainly be regarded as a lyr- 
ical part, and the exhilarating refreshment of the meal, the ef- 
fervescing wine, the distant festive strains of the music, all 
unite to heighten Don Giovanni’s mood, just as his own con- 
viviality casts an augmented light over the whole enjoyment, 
the effect of which is so powerful that even Leporello is trans- 
figured in this luxuriant moment, which is joy’s last smile, 
pleasure’s farewell greeting.'!? But still it is more a situation 
than a purely lyrical part. This, of course, is not due to the eat- 
ing and drinking onstage, for this in itself, regarded as a situ- 
ation, is very inadequate. The situation consists in Don Gio- 
vanni’s being forced out to life’s most extreme point. Pursued 
by the whole world, this triumphant Don Giovanni now has 


112 


134 Either/Or, I 


no other place of residence than a little out-of-the-way room. 
It is at this most extreme tip on life’s springboard that he once 
again, for want of hearty companions, stirs up all the zest for 
life in his own breast. If Don Giovanni were a drama, then this 
internal restlessness in the situation would require that it be as 
brief as possible. But it is proper in the opera for the situation 
to be sustained, to be aggrandized with all possible luxuriance, 
which only sounds the wilder because for the listeners it reso- 
nates in the abyss over which Don Giovanni hovers. 

The champagne aria is different. In my opinion, it would be 
futile to seek a dramatic situation here, but it is all the more 
significant as a lyrical outpouring. Don Juan is tired of the 
many crisscrossing intrigues, but he is by no means fagged 
out. His soul is just as vigorous as ever; he does not need merry 
company, does not need to see and hear the effervescing of the 
wine or to reinvigorate himself with it; his inner vitality breaks 
forth in him stronger and richer than ever. He is still inter- 
preted ideally by Mozart as life, as power, but ideally in the 
face of an actuality; here he is ideally intoxicated, so to speak, 
with himself. If all the girls in the world encircled him at this 
moment, he would not be dangerous to them, for he is, as it 
were, too strong to want to infatuate them; even the most 
multifarious pleasures of actuality are too little for him com- 
pared with what he enjoys in himself. 

What it means to say—that Don Giovanni's essential nature 
is music—is clearly apparent here. He dissolves, as it were, in 
music for us; he unfurls in a world of sounds. This aria has 
been called the champagne aria, and undoubtedly this is very 
suggestive. But what we must see especially is that it does not 
stand in an accidental relation to Don Giovanni. Such is his 
life, effervescing like champagne. And just as the beads in this 
wine, as it simmers with an internal heat, sonorous with its 
own melody, rise and continue to rise, just so the lust for en- 
joyment resonates in the elemental boiling that is his life. 
Therefore, the dramatic significance of this aria comes not 
from the situation but from this, that here the opera’s domi- 
nant tone sounds and resonates in itself. 


The Immediate Erotic Stages 135 


INSIGNIFICANT POSTLUDE 


If what has been developed here is correct, then I return to my 
favorite theme—that Mozart’s Don Giovanni ought to rank 
highest among all the classic works. Then I shall once again re- 
joice over Mozart’s fortune [Lykke], a fortune that is truly en- 
viable, both in and by itself and because it makes happy [lyk- 
kelig] all those with only a moderate comprehension of his 
fortune. I at least feel myself to be indescribably happy in hav- 
ing understood Mozart even remotely and having an intima- 
tion of his fortune. How much more, then, those who have 
understood him perfectly, how much more must they feel 
happy with the fortunate one.!'3 


113 


THE TRAGIC IN ANCIENT DRAMA 
REFLECTED IN THE TRAGIC IN MODERN DRAMA 


A VENTURE IN FRAGMENTARY ENDEAVOR 


Delivered before the 


ZTUUMAQCAVEXOWLEVOL 
[Fellowship of the Dead]' 


If someone were to say: The tragic, after all, is always the 
tragic, I would not have very much to urge to the contrary, 
inasmuch as every historical development always lies within 
the sphere of the concept. On the assumption that his words 
have meaning and that the twice-repeated word “‘tragic’’ is not 
intended to form meaningless parentheses around an empty 
nothing, then his meaning might very well be that the content 
of the concept did not dethrone the concept but enriched it. 
On the other hand, it can scarcely have escaped the attention 
of any observer that there is an essential difference between the 
tragic, ancient and modern—something that the reading and 
theater-going public already considers its legal possession as 
its dividend from the enterprises of the experts in the art. But 
if, in turn, someone were to affirm the distinction absolutely 
and, on the basis of it, at first slyly and later perhaps forcibly 
press this distinction between the tragic in ancient and in mod- 
ern drama, his behavior would be no less unreasonable than 
the first person’s, since he would [forget] that the foothold so 
indispensable to him was the tragic itself. This in turn would 
be so far from distinguishing between the tragic ancient and 
modern that, contrariwise, it would combine them. Indeed, it 
must be as a warning against every such one-sided effort to 
separate that estheticians? always return to the definitions of 
and requirements for the tragic established by Aristotle? as ex- 
hausting the concept. It must be as a warning, and all the more 
so since everyone must be gripped by a certain sadness because 
no matter how much the world has changed, the idea of the 
tragic is still essentially unchanged, just as weeping still con- 
tinues to be equally natural to humankind. 

As reassuring as this might seem to one who does not want 
any separation, least of all any break, the same difficulty that 
has just been dismissed appears in another and almost more 
dangerous form. That there is still a continual return to Aris- 


117 


118 


I 
119 


140 Either/Or, I 


totelian esthetics, not simply because of dutiful deference or 
old habit, will surely be admitted by anyone who has any ac- 
quaintance with modern esthetics* and by this is convinced of 
the scrupulous attachment to the salient points that were ad- 
vanced by Aristotle’ and that are still continually in force in 
modern esthetics. But as soon as one examines them a little 
more closely, the difficulty appears at once. The definitions are 
of a very general kind, and one can very well agree with Aris- 
totle in a way and yet in another sense disagree with him. 

In order not to enter prematurely into the content of the fol- 
lowing exposition by mentioning examples here, I prefer to il- 
lustrate my opinion by making a parallel observation with re- 
gard to comedy. If an ancient esthetician had said that the 
presuppositions of comedy are character and situation and that 
its aim is to arouse laughter, then one could very well return 
to this again and again, but as soon as one pondered how dif- 
ferent the causes of laughter are, one would soon be convinced 
of what an enormous range this requirement has. Anyone who 
has ever made the laughter of others and his own the object of 
observation, who has had in mind, as in this project, not so 
much the accidental as the universal, who has perceived with 
psychological interest how different the occasion of laughter is 
at every age—that person will readily be convinced that the 
unchangeable requirement for comedy, that it must arouse 
laughter, in itself implies a high degree of changeableness in re- 
lation to the ideas of the laughable in the varying world con- 
sciousness, yet without this difference being so diffuse that the 
corresponding expression in the somatic functions would be 
that laughter would manifest itself in weeping. It is the same 
with respect to the tragic. 

That which, generally speaking, should be the content of 
this little exploration will not be so much the relation between 
the tragic in ancient and in modern drama as it will be an at- 
tempt to show how the characteristic feature of the tragic in 
ancient drama is incorporated in the tragic in modern drama in 
such a way that what is truly tragic will become apparent. But 
however much I shall try to make it apparent, I shall abstain 
from any prophecy that this is what the times demand; there- 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 141 


fore its becoming apparent will be devoid of consequence, and 
all the more so since the whole age is working more toward 
the comic. To a degree, existence [ Tilverelse] is undermined 
by the subjects’ doubt; ‘isolation continually gains the upper 
hand more and more, something that can best be ascertained 
by paying attention to the multifarious social endeavors. That 
they seek to counteract the isolating efforts of the age is just as 
much a demonstration of the isolation as is the unreasonable 
way they seek to counteract it. Isolation always consists in as- 
serting oneself as number; when one wants to assert oneself as 
one, this is isolation; all the friends of associations will surely 
agree with me on that, without therefore being able or willing 
to see that it is altogether the same isolation when a hundred 
assert themselves simply and solely as a hundred. Number is 
always indifferent to itself, and it makes absolutely no differ- 
ence whether it is 1 or 1,000, or all the inhabitants of the world 
defined merely numerically. In principle, then, this associa- 
tion-mentality is just as revolutionary as the mentality it wants 
to counteract. When David really wanted to feel his power and 
glory, he had his people counted;’ in our age, however, it may 
be said that the people, in order to feel their significance over 
against a superior power, count themselves. But all these as- 
sociations bear the stamp of arbitrariness and most often are 
formed for some accidental purpose, whose lord and master, 
of course, is the association. 

These numerous associations, therefore, demonstrate the 
disintegration of the age and themselves contribute to speed- 
ing it up; they are the infusiora in the organism of the state that 
indicate that it has disintegrated. When was it that the 
hetairias® became common in Greece except at the time when 
the state was in the process of disintegration? And does not our 
age have a striking likeness to that age, which not even Aris- 
tophanes could make more ludicrous than it actually was? Has 
not the bond that in the political sense held the states together, 
invisibly and spiritually, dissolved; has not the power in reli- 
gion that insisted upon the invisible been weakened and de- 
stroyed; do not our statesmen and clergymen have this in 


120 


142 Either/Or, I 


common, that they, like the augurs of old, cannot look at one 
another without smiling?? 

A feature in which our age certainly excels that age in Greece 
is that our age is more depressed and therefore deeper in de- 
spair. Thus, our age is sufficiently depressed to know that 
there is something called responsibility and that this means 
something. Therefore, although everyone wants to rule, no 
one wants to have responsibility. It is still fresh in our memory 
that a French statesman, when offered a portfolio the second 
time, declared that he would accept it but on the condition that 
the secretary of state be made responsible.’ It is well known 
that the king in France is not responsible, but the prime min- 
ister is; the prime minister does not wish to be responsible but 
wants to be prime minister provided that the secretary of state 
will be responsible; ultimately it ends, of course, with the 
watchmen or street commissioners becoming responsible. 
Would not this inverted story of responsibility be an appropri- 
ate subject for Aristophanes! On the other hand, why are the 
government and the governors so afraid of assuming respon- 
sibility, unless it is because they fear an opposition party that 
in turn continually pushes away responsibility on a similar 
scale. When one imagines these two powers face to face with 
each other but unable to catch hold of each other because the 
one is always disappearing and is replaced by the other, the one 
merely appearing in the role of the other—such a situation 
would certainly not be without comic power. 

This indeed shows adequately that what really holds the 
state together has disintegrated, but the isolation resulting 
from this is naturally comic, and the comic consists in subjec- 
tivity’s wanting to assert itself as pure form. Every isolated 
person always becomes comic by wanting to assert his acci- 
dentality over against the necessity of the process. No doubt it 
would be profoundly comic to have an accidental individual 
hit upon the universal idea of wanting to be the world’s liber- 
ator. Christ’s appearance, however, is in a certain sense the 
most profound tragedy (in another sense it is infinitely much 
more), because Christ came in the fullness of time and bore the 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 143 


sin of the whole world—something that I shall particularly 
stress in connection with what follows. 

It is generally known that Aristotle gives two sources for ac- 
tion in tragedy, Stévoia xat 480g [thought and character]," 
but he also notes that the primary factor is the té\og [end, pur- 
pose] and the individuals do not act in order to present char- 
acters; rather these are included for the sake of action. Here it 
is easy to perceive a difference from modern tragedy.!? What 
specifically characterizes ancient tragedy is that the action does 
not proceed only from character, that the action is not subjec- 
tively reflected enough, but that the action itself has a relative 
admixture of suffering. Ancient tragedy, therefore, did not 
develop dialogue to the point of exhaustive reflection with 
everything merged in it; the distinct components of dialogue 
are actually present in the monologue and chorus. Whether the 
chorus comes closer to epic substantiality or to the lyrical élan, 
it nevertheless seems to provide ‘‘the more,” so to speak, that 
will not merge in the individuality; the monologue, in turn, 
has a more lyrical concentration and has ‘‘the more” that will 
not merge in action and situation. In ancient tragedy, the ac- 
tion itself has an epic element; it is just as much event as action. 
This, of course, is because the ancient world did not have sub- 
jectivity reflected in itself.! Even if the individual moved 
freely, he nevertheless rested in substantial determinants, in 
the state, the family, in fate. This substantial determinant is the 
essential fateful factor in Greek tragedy and is its essential char- 
acteristic. The hero’s downfall, therefore, is not a result solely 
of his action but is also a suffering, whereas in modern tragedy 
the hero’s downfall is not really suffering but is a deed. Thus, 
in the modern period situation and character are in fact pre- 
dominant. The tragic hero is subjectively reflected in himself, 
and this reflection has not only reflected him out of every im- 
mediate relation to state, kindred, and fate but often has even 
reflected him out of his own past life. What concerns us is a 
certain specific element of his life as his own deed. For this rea- 
son, the tragic can be exhausted in situation and lines because 
no immediacy is left at all. Therefore, modern tragedy has no 


121 


122 


144 Either/Or, I 


epic foreground, no epic remainder. The hero stands and falls 
entirely on his own deeds. 

What is here briefly but sufficiently developed will have its 
importance in explaining a difference between ancient and 
modern tragedy that I regard as very important—the different 
nature of tragic guilt. It is well known that Aristotle insists that 
the tragic hero have é&amp;yagtia [error].'* But just as the action in 
Greek tragedy is something intermediate between action and 
the suffering, so also is guilt, and therein lies the tragic colli- 
sion. But the more the subjectivity is reflective, the more 
Pelagianly'&gt; one sees the individual thrown solely upon him- 
self, the more ethical guilt becomes. Between these two ex- 
tremes lies the tragic. If the individual has no guilt whatever, 
the tragic interest is annulled, for in that case the tragic colli- 
sion is enervated. On the other hand, if he has absolute guilt, 
he no longer interests us tragically. It is, therefore, surely a 
misunderstanding of the tragic when our age endeavors to 
have everything fateful transubstantiate itself into individual- 
ity and subjectivity. We want to know nothing about the 
hero’s past; we load his whole life upon his shoulders as his 
own deed, make him accountable for everything, but in so 
doing we also transform his esthetic guilt into ethical guilt. In 
this way, the tragic hero becomes bad, evil actually becomes 
the tragic subject, but evil has no esthetic interest, and sin is 
not an esthetic element. 

This misguided enterprise may somehow have its basis in 
the working of the whole age toward the comic. The comic 
lies precisely in the isolation; when one wants to affirm the 
tragic within this isolation, one has evil in its badness, not the 
authentic tragic guilt in its ambiguous guiltlessness. 

It is not difficult to find examples if one looks at modern lit- 
erature. For example, the work by Grabbe, Faust und Don 
Juan"® (in many ways a work of genius), is built upon evil. But, 
rather than to argue on the basis of a single work, I prefer to 
show it in the common consciousness of the whole contem- 
porary age. If one wanted to depict an individual whose un- 
fortunate childhood had played such havoc with him that these 
impressions caused his downfall, such a thing would have no 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 145 


appeal at all to the present age—not, of course, because it was 
poorly done, for I take the liberty of assuming it was excel- 
lently done, but because this age applies another standard. It 
will have nothing to do with such coddling; it automatically 
makes the individual responsible for his life. Consequently, if 
the individual succumbs, this is not tragic, but it is bad. One 
would think that the generation in which I have the honor of 
living must be a kingdom of gods. But this is by no means so; 
the vigor, the courage, that wants to be the creator of its own 
good fortune in this way, indeed, its own creator, is an illu- 
sion, and when the age loses the tragic, it gains despair. In the 
tragic there is implicit a sadness and a healing that one indeed 
must not disdain, and when someone wishes to gain himself in 
the superhuman way our age tries to do it, he loses himself!” 
and becomes comic. Every individual, however original he is, 
is still a child of God, of his age, of his nation, of his family, of 
his friends, and only in them does he have his truth. Ifhe wants 
to be the absolute in all this, his relativity, then he becomes lu- 
dicrous. In languages, there is sometimes found a word that 
because of its context is so frequently used in a specific case 
that it eventually becomes, if you please, independent as an ad- 
verb in this case.'® For the experts such a word has once and for 
all an accent and a flaw that it never lives down; if, then, this 
notwithstanding, it should claim to be a substantive and de- 
mand to be declined in all five cases, it would be genuinely 
comic. So it goes with the individual also when he, perhaps 
extracted from the womb of time laboriously enough, wants 
to be absolute in this enormous relativity. But if he surrenders 
this claim, is willing to be relative, then he eo ipso has the 
tragic, even if he were the happiest individual—indeed, I 
would say the individual is not happy until he has the tragic. 
Intrinsically, the tragic is infinitely gentle; esthetically it is to 
human life what divine grace and compassion are; it is even 
more benign, and therefore I say that it is a motherly love that 
lulls the troubled one. The ethical is rigorous and hard. There- 
fore, if a criminal before the judge wants to excuse himself by 
saying that his mother had a propensity for stealing, especially 
during the time she was pregnant with him, the judge obtains 


123 


124 


146 Either/Or, I 


the health officer’s opinion of his mental condition and decides 
that he is dealing with a thief and not with the thief’s mother. 
Insofar as the issue here is a crime, the sinner certainly cannot 
flee into the temple of esthetics, but nevertheless it will indeed 
have a mitigating word for him. But it would be wrong for 
him to seek refuge there, for his path takes him to the reli- 
gious, not to the esthetic. The esthetic lies behind him, and it 
would be a new sin on his part to seize the esthetic now. The 
religious is the expression for fatherly love, for it embraces the 
ethical, but it is mitigated, and by what means—by the very 
same means that give the tragic its gentleness, by means of 
continuity. But although the esthetic provides this repose be- 
fore sin’s profound discrepancy is asserted, the religious does 
not provide it until this discrepancy is seen in all its frightful- 
ness. At the very moment the sinner almost swoons under the 
universal sin that he has taken upon himself because he felt 
simply that the more guilty he became the greater would be 
the prospect of being saved, at that same dreadful moment he 
has the consoling thought that it is universal sinfulness that has 
asserted itself also in him. But this comfort is a religious com- 
fort, and anyone who thinks he can attain it in any other way, 
by esthetic volatilization, for example, has taken the comfort 
in vain, and he actually does not have it. In a certain sense, 
therefore, it is a very appropriate discretion on the part of the 
age to want to make the individual responsible for everything; 
the trouble is that it does not do it profoundly and inwardly 
enough, and hence its half-measures. It is conceited enough to 
disdain the tears of tragedy, but it is also conceited enough to 
want to do without mercy. And what, after all, is human life, 
the human race, when these two things are taken away? Either 
the sadness of the tragic or the profound sorrow and profound 
joy of religion. Or is this not the striking feature of everything 
that originates in that happy people!*—a depression of spirit, a 
sadness in their art, in their poetry, in their life, in their joy? 
In the foregoing discussion, I have especially sought to 
stress the difference between ancient and modern tragedy in- 
sofar as it is apparent in the difference in the guilt of the tragic 
hero. This is the real focal point from which everything ema- 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 147 


nates in its specific difference. If the hero is unequivocally 
guilty, monologue vanishes, fate vanishes; then thought is 
transparent in dialogue, and action in situation. The same 
thing may be stated from another side—namely, from the per- 
spective of the mood that the tragedy evokes. It is well known 
that Aristotle maintains that tragedy should arouse fear and 
compassion [Medlidenhed] in the spectator.”° I recall that Hegel 
in his Esthetics?! picks up this comment and on each of these 
points makes a double observation, which, however, is not 
very exhaustive. When Aristotle distinguishes between fear 
and compassion, one presumably could rather think of the fear 
as the mood accompanying the particular and of the compas- 
sion as the mood that is the definitive impression. This latter 
mood is the one I have particularly in mind because it is the one 
corresponding to tragic guilt and therefore also has the same 
implicit dialectic as that concept. On this point, Hegel notes 
that there are two kinds of compassion, the usual kind that 
turns its attention to the finite side of suffering, and the truly 
tragic compassion. This observation is altogether correct but 
to me of less importance, since that universal emotion is a mis- 
understanding that can befall modern tragedy just as much as 
ancient tragedy. But what he adds with regard to true com- 
passion is true and powerful: “das wahrhafte Mitleiden ist im 
Gegentheil die Sympathie mit der zugleich sittlichen Berech- 
tigung des Leidenden [true sympathy, on the contrary, is an 
accordant feeling with the ethical claim at the same time asso- 
ciated with the sufferer]’’ (III, p. 531). 

Whereas Hegel considers compassion more in general and 
its differentiation in the difference of individualities, I prefer to 
stress the difference in compassion in relation to the difference 
in tragic guilt. To indicate this difference at once, I shall sepa- 
rate the Lidende [suffering] in the word Medlidenhed {compas- 
sion] and add in each instance the sympathy implicit in the pre- 
fix med [with], yet in such a way that I do not come to predicate 
something about the spectator’s mood that could indicate his 
arbitrariness, but in such a way that in expressing the differ- 
ence in his mood I also convey the difference in the tragic guilt. 
In ancient tragedy, the sorrow is more profound, the pain less; 


125 


126 


148 Either/Or, I 


in modern tragedy, the pain is greater, the sorrow less. Sorrow 
always has in it something more substantial than pain. Pain 
always indicates a reflection upon the suffering that sorrow 
does not know. Psychologically, it is very interesting to ob- 
serve a child when he sees an adult suffer. ‘The child is not 
sufficiently reflective to feel pain, and yet his sorrow is infi- 
nitely deep. He is not sufficiently reflective to have an idea of 
sin and guilt; when he sees an adult suffer, it does not cross his 
mind to think about that, and yet if the reason for the suffering 
is hidden from him, there is a dark presentiment of the reason 
in the child’s sorrow. So it is also, but in complete and deep har- 
mony, with the sorrow of the Greeks, and that is why it is si- 
multaneously so gentle and so deep. On the other hand, when 
an adult sees a young person, a child, suffer, the pain is greater, 
the sorrow less. The more pronounced the idea of guilt, the 
greater the pain, the less profound the sorrow. 

Applying this now to the relation between ancient and mod- 
ern tragedy, one may say: In ancient tragedy, the sorrow is 
more profound, and in the corresponding consciousness the 
sorrow is more profound. It must continually be kept in mind 
that this is not in me but in the tragedy and that, in order to 
understand properly the profound sorrow in Greek tragedy, I 
must live into the Greek consciousness. Therefore, when so 
many admire Greek tragedy, it no doubt is often just parrot- 
ing, for it is obvious that our age at least has no great sympathy 
for what is the truly Greek sorrow. The sorrow is more pro- 
found because the guilt has esthetic ambiguity. In modern 
times, the pain is greater. One could say of Greek tragedy that 
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” 
The wrath of the gods is terrible, but still the pain is not as 
great as in modern tragedy, where the hero suffers his total 
guilt, is transparent to himself in his suffering of his guilt. 

It is appropriate at this point to show, as with tragic guilt, 
which sorrow is true esthetic sorrow and which is true esthetic 
pain. The most bitter pain is obviously repentance, but re- 
pentance has ethical, not esthetic, reality [Realitet].?° It is the 
most bitter pain because it has the complete transparency of 
the total guilt, but precisely because of this transparency it 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 149 


does not interest esthetically. Repentance has a holiness that 
eclipses the esthetic. It does not want to be seen, least of all 
by a spectator, and requires an altogether different kind of 
self-activity. To be sure, modern comedy has at times brought 
repentance onto the stage, but this only betrays a lack of judg- 
ment in the author. One is indeed reminded of the psycholog- 
ical interest there can be in seeing repentance depicted, but 
again psychological interest is not the esthetic. This is part of 
the confusion that manifests itself in so many ways in our day: 
something is sought where one should not seek it; and what is 
worse, it is found where one should not find it. One wishes to 
be edified in the theater, to be esthetically stimulated in church; 
one wishes to be converted by novels, to be entertained by de- 
votional books; one wishes to have philosophy in the pulpit 
and a preacher on the lecture platform. This pain, then, is not 
esthetic pain, and yet it is obviously that which the present age 
is working toward as the supreme tragic interest. 

This also turns out to be the case with tragic guilt. Our age 
has lost all the substantial categories of family, state, kindred; 
27%t must turn the single individual over to himself completely 
in such a way that, strictly speaking, he becomes his own cre- 
ator. Consequently his guilt is sin, his pain repentance, but 
thereby the tragic is canceled. Furthermore, suffering tragedy 
in the stricter sense has essentially lost its tragic interest, for the 
power that is the source of the suffering has lost its meaning, 
and the spectator shouts: Help yourself, and heaven will help 
you—in other words, the spectator has lost compassion, but in 
a subjective and also in an objective sense compassion is the au- 
thentic expression of the tragic. 

For the sake of clarity, before developing this exposition 
further, I shall define a little more explicitly true esthetic sor- 
row. Sorrow and pain move in opposite directions. If one does 
not want to spoil this by a foolish consistency (something that 
I shall prevent in also another way), one may say: The greater 
the guiltlessness, the greater the sorrow. If this is insisted 
upon, the tragic will be canceled. An element of guilt always 
remains, but this element is not actually reflected subjectively; 
this is why the sorrow in Greek tragedy is so profound. To 


I 
127 


128 


150 Ejither/Or, I 


forestall premature conclusions, I shall just point out that 
overstatements result only in shifting the issue over into an- 
other realm. The unity of absolute guiltlessness and absolute 
guilt is not an esthetic category but a metaphysical one. 

The real reason people have always had scruples about call- 
ing the life of Christ a tragedy is that they felt that esthetic cat- 
egories do not exhaust the matter. That the life of Christ is 
something more than can be exhausted in esthetic categories is 
apparent also in another way—namely, that these neutralize 
themselves in this phenomenon and are rendered inconse- 
quential. Tragic action always contains an element of suffer- 
ing, and tragic suffering an element of action; the esthetic lies 
in their relativity. The identity of an absolute action and an ab- 
solute suffering is beyond the powers of the esthetic and be- 
longs to the metaphysical. In the life of Christ there is this 
identity, for his suffering is absolute, since it is absolutely free 
action, and his action is absolute suffering, since it is absolute 
obedience. 

Thus, the element of guilt that remains is not subjectively 
reflected, and this makes the sorrow profound. In other 
words, tragic guilt is more than just subjective guilt—it is 
hereditary guilt; but hereditary guilt, like hereditary sin, is a 
substantial category, and it is precisely this substantiality that 
makes the sorrow more profound. 

The ever admired trilogy of Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonus, 
Oedipus the King, and Antigone, hinges essentially on this gen- 
uine tragic interest. But hereditary guilt involves the contra- 
diction of being guilt and yet not being guilt.22 The bond by 
which the individual becomes guilty is precisely [filial] piety, 
but the guilt that it thereby incurs has every possible esthetic 
amphiboly.”? One might promptly think that the people who 
must have developed the profoundly tragic was the Jewish na- 
tion. For example, when it is said of Jehovah that he is a jeal- 
ous God, that he visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the 
children to the third and fourth generations,*° or when we hear 
those terrible curses in the Old Testament, one could easily be 
tempted to want to seek tragic material here. But Judaism is 
too ethically mature for that; even though they are terrible, Je- 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 151 


hovah’s curses are also righteous punishment. It was not this 
way in Greece; the wrath of the gods has no ethical character, 
only esthetic ambiguity. 

In Greek tragedy itself, there is a transition from sorrow to 
pain, and I would cite Philoctetes as an example of this.*! In a 
stricter sense, this is a tragedy of suffering. But here, too, a 
high degree of objectivity still prevails. The Greek hero rests 
in his fate; his fate is unalterable; of that there can be no further 
discussion. This element is really the component of sorrow in 
the pain. The first doubt with which pain really begins is this: 
Why is this happening to me; can it not be otherwise? To be 
sure, Philoctetes?? has something that has always been striking 
to me and that essentially separates it from that immortal tril- 
ogy: a high degree of reflection**—the masterly depicted self- 
contradiction in his pain, in which there is such profound hu- 
man truth, but still there is an objectivity that carries the 
whole. Philoctetes’ reflection is not absorbed in itself, and it is 
genuinely Greek when he laments that no one knows his 
pain.* There is an extraordinary truth in this, and yet precisely 
here there is also a manifestation of the difference from the 
really reflective pain that always wants to be alone with its 
pain, that seeks a new pain in the solitude of this pain. 

The true tragic sorrow, then, requires an element of guilt, 
the true tragic pain an element of guiltlessness; the true tragic 
sorrow requires an element of transparency, the true tragic 
pain an element of opacity. I believe this is the best way to sug- 
gest the dialectic in which the qualifications of sorrow and pain 
touch each other, and also the dialectic implicit in the concept: 
tragic guilt. 

Since it is at variance with the aims of our association* to 
provide coherent works or larger unities, since it is not our in- 
tention to labor on a Tower of Babel that God in his right- 
eousness can descend and destroy, since we, in our conscious- 
ness that such confusion justly occurred, acknowledge as 
characteristic of all human endeavor in its truth that it is frag- 
mentary, that it is precisely this which distinguishes it from 
nature’s infinite coherence, that an individual’s wealth consists 
specifically in his capacity for fragmentary prodigality and 


129 


152 Either/Or, I 


what is the producing individual’s enjoyment is the receiving 
individual’s also, not the laborious and careful accomplish- 
ment or the tedious interpretation of this accomplishment but 
the production and the pleasure of the glinting transiency, 
which for the producer holds much more than the consum- 
mated accomplishment, since it is a glimpse of the idea and 
holds a bonus for the recipient, since its fulguration [Fulgura- 
tion]°&gt; stimulates his own productivity—since all this, I say, is 
at variance with our association’s inclination, indeed, since the 
periodic sentence just read must almost be regarded as a seri- 
ous attack on the ejaculatory style in which the idea breaks 
forth without achieving a breakthrough, to which officiality is 
attached in our society—therefore, after having pointed out 
that my conduct still cannot be called mutinous, inasmuch as 
the bond that holds this periodic sentence together is so loose 
that the parenthetical clauses therein strut about aphoristically 
and willfully enough, I shall merely call to mind that my style 
has made an attempt to appear to be what it is not: revolution- 
ary. 

Our society requires a renewal and rebirth at every single 
meeting and to that end requires that its intrinsic activity be re- 
juvenated by a new description of its productivity. Let us, 
then, designate our intention as a venture in fragmentary en- 
deavor or the art of writing posthumous [efterladt, left behind] 
papers. A completely finished work is disproportionate to the 
poetizing personality; because of the disjointed and desultory 
character of unfinished papers, one feels a need to poetize the 
personality along with them. Unfinished papers are like a ruin, 
and what place of resort could be more natural for the buried? 
The art, then, is to produce skillfully the same effect, the same 
carelessness and fortuitousness, the same anacoluthic [anako- 
luthisk] thought process; the art is to evoke an enjoyment that 
is never present tense but always has an element of the past and 
thus is present in the past. This is already expressed in the 
expression “‘left behind.” Indeed, in a certain sense everything 
a poet has produced is something left behind, but it would 
never occur to anyone to call a completely finished work a 
work left behind, even if it had the accidental feature of not 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 153 


having been published in his lifetime. I also assume it to be a 
feature of all authentic human production in its truth, as we 
have interpreted it, that it is property left behind, since it is not 
granted to human beings to live with an eternal view like the 
gods’. Consequently, I shall call what is being produced 
among us property left behind [Efterladenskab], that is, artistic 
property left behind; negligence [Efterladenhed], indolence, we 
shall call the genius that we prize; the vis inertiae [force of in- 
ertia] we shall call the natural law that we worship. With this I 
have complied with our hallowed customs and conventions. 

So, my dear Zuuraeavexewpevor, come closer to me, forma 
circle around me as I send my tragic heroine out into the 
world, *’as I give the daughter of sorrow a dowry of pain as 
her outfit. She is my work, but still her outline is so indistinct, 
her form so nebulous, that each and every one of you can for- 
liebe sig®® (fall in love] with her and be able to love her in your 
own way. She is my creation, her thoughts are my thoughts, 
and yet it is as if in a night of love [ had rested with her, as if 
she in my embrace had confided a deep secret to me, had 
breathed it out together with her soul, as if she had then in- 
stantly changed before me, had disappeared, so that the only 
trace of her actuality was the mood that remained behind, in- 
stead of the reverse situation that she is brought forth by my 
mood to ever greater actuality. I put words into her mouth, 
and yet it seems to me as if I abused her confidence; it seems to 
me as if she were standing reproachfully behind me, and yet it 
is the reverse—in her secrecy she becomes ever more visible. 
She belongs to me, she lawfully belongs to me, and yet at 
times it is as if | had cunningly crept into her confidence, as if 
I always had to look behind me for her; and yet it is the reverse, 
she is always in front of me—only as I lead her forward does 
she come into existence. 

Antigone*? is her name. I shall keep this name from the an- 
cient tragedy, to which I shall hold for the most part, although 
from another angle everything will be modern. But first one 
comment. I am using a female character* because I believe that 
a female nature will be best suited to show the difference. Asa 
woman, she will have enough substantiality*! for the sorrow 


{ 
130 


131 


154 Either/Or, I 


to manifest itself, but as one belonging to a reflective world she 
will have sufficient reflection to experience the pain. In order 
for the sorrow to be experienced, the tragic guilt must vacillate 
between guilt and guiltlessness, and the vehicle by which guilt 
enters her consciousness must always be a qualification of sub- 
stantiality. But since the tragic guilt must have this indefinite- 
ness in order for the sorrow to be experienced, reflection must 
not be present in its infinitude, for then it would reflect her out 
of her guilt, inasmuch as reflection in its infinite subjectivity 
cannot allow the factor of hereditary sin, which produces the 
sorrow, to remain. But since reflection has been awakened, it 
will reflect her not out of the sorrow but into it; at every mo- 
ment it will transform sorrow into pain for her. 

So, then, the family of Labdakos* is the object of the indig- 
nation of the gods:*? Oedipus has killed the sphinx, liberated 
Thebes; Oedipus has murdered his father, married his mother; 
and Antigone is the fruit of this marriage. So it goes in the 
Greek tragedy. Here I deviate. With me, everything is the 
same, and yet everything is different. Everyone knows that he 
has killed the sphinx and freed Thebes, and Oedipus is hailed 
and admired and is happy in his marriage with Jocasta. The 
rest is hidden from the people’s eyes, and no suspicion has ever 
brought this horrible dream into the world of actuality. Only 
Antigone knows it. How she found out is extraneous to the 
tragic interest, and in that respect everyone is left to his own 
explanation. At an early age, before she had reached maturity, 
dark hints of this horrible secret had momentarily gripped her 
soul, until certainty hurled her with one blow into the arms of 
anxiety. Here at once I have a definition of the tragic in mod- 
ern times, for an anxiety is a reflection and in that respect is es- 
sentially different from sorrow. Anxiety is the vehicle by 
which the subject appropriates sorrow and assimilates it. Anx- 
iety is the motive power by which sorrow penetrates a per- 
son’s heart. But the movement is not swift like that of an ar- 
row; it is consecutive; it is not once and for all, but it is 
continually becoming. As a passionately erotic glance craves 
its object, so anxiety looks cravingly upon sorrow. Just as the 
quiet, incorruptible eye of love is preoccupied with the be- 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 155 


loved object, so anxiety’s self-preoccupation is with sorrow. 
But anxiety has an added factor that makes it cling even harder 
to its object, for it both loves and fears it. Anxiety has a double 
function; in part it is the exploring movement that continually 
makes contact and by this groping discovers sorrow as it cir- 
cles around it. Or anxiety is sudden; all the sorrow is lodged in 
one instant, yet in such a way that this instant immediately dis- 
solves in a consecutive series. In this sense, anxiety is a genuine 
tragic category, and the old saying quem deus vult perdere, pri- 
mum dementat [whom a god would destroy he first makes 
mad]** is really and truly applicable here. “That anxiety is a re- 
flection category is shown by language itself, for I always say 
that I am anxious about something, and I thereby distinguish 
between the anxiety and that about which I am anxious, and I 
can never use “‘anxiety” objectively; whereas when I say ‘““my 
sorrow,” I can be expressing as much about what I am griev- 
ing over as about my sorrow over it. Furthermore, anxiety al- 
ways contains a reflection on time, for I cannot be anxious 
about the present but only about the past or the future, but the 
past and the future, kept in opposition to each other in such a 
way that the present vanishes, are categories of reflection. 
Greek sorrow, however, like all Greek life, is in the present, 
and therefore the sorrow is deeper, but the pain less. Anxiety, 
therefore, belongs essentially to the tragic. Hamlet is such a 
tragic figure because he suspects his mother’s crime. Robert le 
diable** asks how it could happen that he does so much evil. 
Hoegne,*” whom his mother had conceived with a troll, acci- 
dentally comes to see his image in the water and asks his 
mother whence his body acquired such a form. 

The difference is easy to see now. In Greek tragedy, Antig- 
one is not occupied at all with her father’s unfortunate fate. 
This rests like an impregnable sorrow on the whole family. 
Antigone, like every other young Greek girl, goes on living 
free from care—indeed, since her death is determined, the cho- 
rus is sorry for her because she must depart from this life at 
such a young age, depart from it without having tasted its 
most beautiful joy—obviously forgetful of the family’s own 
profound sorrow. This by no means says that it is light-mind- 


132 


133 


156 Either/Or, I 


edness or that the particular individual stands all alone without 
concern for his relationships to the family. But this is genu- 
inely Greek. To them, life relationships, like the horizon under 
which they live, are given once and for all. Even though this is 
dark and full of clouds, it is also unchangeable. This gives a 
dominant tone to the soul, and this is sorrow, not pain. In 
Antigone, the tragic guilt is focused upon a specific point, that 
she has buried her brother in defiance of the king’s injunction. 
If this is viewed as an isolated fact, as a collision between sis- 
terly love and piety and an arbitrary human injunction, Antig- 
one would cease to be a Greek tragedy; it would be an alto- 
gether modern tragic theme. What provides the tragic interest 
in the Greek sense is that Oedipus’s sad fate resonates in the 
brother’s unfortunate death, in the sister’s conflict with a spe- 
cific human injunction; it is, as it were, the afterpains, Oedi- 
pus’s tragic fate, spreading out into each branch of his family. 
This totality makes the spectator’s sorrow so very profound. 
It is not an individual who goes under, but a little world; it is 
the objective grief, unloosed, that now strides ahead, like a 
force of nature, in its own terrible consistency, and Antigone’s 
sad fate is like the echo of her father’s, an intensified sorrow. 
Therefore, when Antigone, in defiance of the king’s injunc- 
tion, decides to bury her brother, we see in this not so much a 
free act as a fateful necessity, which visits the iniquities of the 
fathers upon the children. There is indeed enough freedom in 
it to enable us to love Antigone for her sisterly love, but in the 
inevitability of fate there is also a higher refrain, as it were, that 
encompasses not only Oedipus’s life but also his family. 
Whereas the Greek Antigone goes on living so free from 
care that, if this new fact had not come up, one could imagine 
her life as even happy in its gradual unfolding, our Antigone’s 
life, on the other hand, is essentially at an end. I have not en- 
dowed her parsimoniously, and, as is said, a good word in the 
right place is like golden apples in a silver bow];* so also I have 
placed the fruit of grief in the bowl of pain. Her endowment is 
not vainglorious pomp that moth and rust can consume;&gt; it is 
an eternal treasure. Thieves cannot break in and steal it; she 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 157 


herself is too alert for that. Her life does not unfold like the 
Greek Antigone’s; it is turned inward, not outward. The stage 
is inside, not outside; it is a spiritual stage. 

My dear Zupnapavexempevor, have I not managed to capture 
your interest for such a maiden, or shall I resort to a captatio 
benevolentiae [procedure aimed at gaining the favorable dispo- 
sition of the judge or listener]? She, too, does not belong to the 
world in which she lives; although healthy and flourishing, her 
real life is nevertheless hidden. She, too, although alive, is in 
another sense dead; her life is quiet and concealed. The world 
does not hear even a sigh, for her sighing is concealed in the 
secrecy of her soul. I do not need to remind you that she is by 
no means a weak and morbid woman; on the contrary, she is 
proud and energetic. 

Perhaps nothing ennobles a person so much as keeping a se- 
cret. It gives a person’s whole life a significance, which it has, 
of course, only for himself; it saves a person from all futile con- 
sideration of the surrounding world. Sufficient unto himself, 
he rests blissful in his secret; this might be said even though his 
secret is a most baleful one. 

So it is with our Antigone. She is proud of her secret, proud 
that she has been selected in a singular way to save the honor 
and glory of the lineage of Oedipus. When the grateful nation 
acclaims Oedipus with praise and thanksgiving, she feels her 
own significance, and her secret sinks deeper and deeper into 
her soul, ever more inaccessible to any living being. She feels 
how much has been placed into her hands, and this gives her 
the preternatural magnitude that is necessary in order for her 
to engage us tragically. She must be able to interest us as a par- 
ticular character. She is more than a young girl in a general 
sense, and yet she is a young girl; she is a bride, and yet alto- 
gether virginal and pure. °!As a bride, woman has fulfilled her 
destiny, and therefore a woman generally can concern us only 
to the degree that she is brought in relation to this her destiny. 

There are analogies to this. We speak, for example, of a 
bride of God; in faith and spirit she has the content in which 
she rests. In a perhaps still more beautiful sense, 1 would call 


134 


I 
135 


158 Either/Or, I 


our Antigone a bride—indeed, she is almost more, she is a 
mother. Purely esthetically, she is virgo mater [virgin mother]; 
she carries her secret under her heart, concealed and hidden. 
Precisely because she is secretive, she is silence, but this turn- 
ing back into oneself implicit in silence gives her a preternat- 
ural bearing. She is proud of her grief, she is jealous of it, for 
her grief is her love. But yet her grief is not a dead, static pos- 
session; it is continually in motion; it gives birth to pain and is 
born in pain. Just as when a girl resolves to sacrifice her life for 
an idea, when she stands there with the sacrificial wreath on 
her forehead, she stands as a bride, for the great animating idea 
transforms her, and the sacrificial wreath is like the bridal 
wreath. She knows not any man,* and yet she is a bride; she 
does not even know the idea that animates her, for that would 
be unfeminine, and yet she is a bride. 

So it is with our Antigone, the bride of sorrow. She dedi- 
cates her life to sorrowing over her father’s fate, over her own. 
A calamity such as the one that has befallen her father requires 
sorrow, and yet there is no one who can sorrow over it, since 
there is no one who knows it. And just as the Greek Antigone 
cannot bear to have her brother’s body thrown away without 
the last honors, so she feels how harsh it would have been if no 
one had come to know this; it troubles her that not a tear 
would have been shed, and she almost thanks the gods because 
she has been selected as this instrument. Thus, Antigone is 
great in her pain. Here, too, I can point out a difference be- 
tween Greek and modern tragedy. It is genuinely Greek for 
Philoctetes to lament that no one knows what he is suffering; 
it is a deeply human need to want others to understand it, but 
reflective pain does not desire this. It does not occur to Antig- 
one to wish anyone to come to know her pain, but instead she 
feels the pain in relation to her father, feels the justice implicit 
in sorrowing, which is just as warranted esthetically as is suf- 
fering punishment when one has done wrong. Therefore, 
while it is first the awareness of being destined to be buried 
alive that extorts this outburst of grief from Antigone in the 
Greek tragedy, 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 159 


(850) im dvatavoc, 

ott év 6gotois, év vexeoton, 

ustoixos, ob C@atv, od Favovoa* 

[alive to the place of corpses, an alien still, 

never at home with the living nor with the dead],&gt;° 


our Antigone can say this of herself all her life. There is a strik- 
ing difference; there is a factual truth in her utterance that di- 
minishes the pain. If our Antigone were to say the same thing, 
it would be figurative, but the figurativeness is the factual 
pain. The Greeks do not express themselves figuratively sim- 
ply because their lives did not have the reflection required for 
this. Thus, when Philoctetes laments that he lives abandoned 
and solitary on a desolate island, his remark also has external 
truth; when, however, our Antigone feels pain in her solitude, 
it is only figuratively that she is alone, but for this very reason, 
only then is her pain truly literal. 

As for the tragic guilt, it is related in part to the fact that she 
buries her brother and in part to the context of her father’s sad 
fate implied by the two previous tragedies. Here I am face to 
face again with the curious dialectic that places the family’s in- 
iquities in relation to the individual. This is what is inherited. 
Ordinarily, dialectic is thought to be rather abstract—one 
thinks almost solely of logical operations. But life will quickly 
teach a person that there are many kinds of dialectic, that al- 
most every passion has its own. For this reason, the dialectic 
that connects the iniquity of kindred or of family to the indi- 
vidual subject in such a way that this one not only suffers un- 
der it (for this is a natural consequence against which one 
would futilely try to harden oneself) but also bears the guilt, 
participates in it—this dialectic is alien to us, contains nothing 
constraining for us. If, however, we were to imagine a rebirth 
of ancient tragedy, then every individual would have to con- 
template his own rebirth, not only in the spiritual sense but in 
the finite sense of the womb of family and kindred. The di- 


* (844) O weh, Unselige! 
Nicht unter Menschen, nicht unter Todten, 
Im Leben nicht heimisch noch im Tode!* 


136 


137 


160 Either/Or, I 


alectic that connects the individual with family and kindred is 
no subjective dialectic, for that elevates the connection and the 
individual out of the context; it is an objective dialectic. It is 
essentially [familial] piety. To preserve this cannot be regarded 
as harmful to the individual. In our day something is deemed 
to hold in the sphere of nature that is not deemed to hold in the 
sphere of spirit. Yet one does not want to be so isolated, so un- 
natural, that one does not regard the family as a whole of 
which it can be said that when one member suffers, then they 
all suffer.°&gt; One does this spontaneously—otherwise for what 
reason is the particular individual so afraid that another mem- 
ber of the family may bring disgrace upon it except that he 
feels a share of the suffering from it. Obviously the individual 
must put up with this suffering, whether he wants to or not. 
But since the point of departure is the individual, not the fam- 
ily line, this compulsory suffering is maximum; one feels that 
the person cannot quite become master of his inherited char- 
acteristics but nevertheless desires this as far as possible. But if 
the individual sees the inherited characteristics as a component 
of his truth, then this manifests itself in the world of spirit in 
such a way that the individual participates in the guilt. Perhaps 
not many are able to comprehend this conclusion, but then 
they would not be able to comprehend the tragic, either. If the 
individual is isolated, then cither he is absolutely the creator of 
his own fate, and then there is nothing tragic anymore, but 
only evil, for it is not even tragic that the individual was infat- 
uated with or wrapped up in himself—it is his own doing; or 
the individuals are merely modifications of the eternal sub- 
stance of life, and so once again the tragic is lost. 

With respect to tragic guilt, a difference in modern tragedy 
is readily apparent after it has assimilated the ancient, for only 
then can this really be discussed. In her childlike piety, the 
Greek Antigone participates in her father’s guilt, and so also 
does the modern Antigone. But for the Greek Antigone the fa- 
ther’s guilt and suffering are an external fact, an unshakable 
fact, that her sorrow does not move (quod non volvit in pectore 
[something that she does not turn over in her heart]);5¢ and in- 
sofar as she personally suffers, as a natural consequence, under 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 161 


her father’s guilt, this again is in all its external factuality. But 
for our Antigone it is different. I assume that Oedipus is dead. 
Even when he was alive, Antigone knew this secret but did not 
have the courage to confide in her father. By her father’s death, 
she is deprived of the only means of being liberated from her 
secret. To confide in any other living being now would be to 
dishonor her father; her life acquires meaning for her in its de- 
votion to showing him the last honors daily, almost hourly, 
by her unbroken silence. But one thing she does not know, 
whether or not her father knew it himself. Here is the modern 
element: it is the restlessness in her sorrow, it is the 
amphiboly*’ in her pain. She loves her father with all her soul, 
and this love draws her out of herself into her father’s guilt. As 
the fruit of such a love, she feels alien to humankind. She feels 
her guilt the more she loves her father; only with him can she 
find rest; as equally guilty, they would sorrow with each 
other. But while the father was living, she could not confide 
her sorrow to him, for she indeed did not know whether he 
knew it, and consequently there was the possibility of im- 
mersing him in a similar pain. And yet, if he had not known 
it, the guilt would be less. The movement here is continually 
relative. If Antigone had not definitely known the factual con- 
text, she would have been trivial, she would then have had 
nothing but a suspicion to struggle with, and that is too little 
to engage us tragically. But she knows everything; yet within 
this knowledge there is still an ignorance that can always keep 
the sorrow in motion, always transform it into pain. In addi- 
tion, she is continually in conflict with her surrounding world. 
Oedipus lives in the memory of his people as a fortunate king, 
honored and extolled; Antigone herself has admired and also 
loved her father. She takes part in every commemoration and 
celebration of him; she is more enthusiastic about her father 
than any other maiden in the kingdom; her thoughts contin- 
ually go back to him. She is extolled in the land as a model of 
a loving daughter, and yet this enthusiasm is the only way in 
which she can give vent to her sorrow. Her father is always in 
her thoughts, but how—that is her painful secret. And yet she 
does not dare to abandon herself to sorrow, does not dare to 


138 


139 


162 Either/Or, I 


mourn; she feels how much depends upon her; she fears that a 
clue would be given if anyone saw her suffering, and so here, 
too, she finds not sorrow but pain. 

Developed and elaborated in this way, Antigone can engage 
us, I believe, and I believe that you will not reproach me for 
frivolousness or paternal prejudice when I believe that she 
might very well venture into the tragic line and appear in a 
tragedy. Hitherto she has been only an epic character, and the 
tragic in her has had only epic interest. 

A context appropriate to her is not very difficult to find, 
either; in that respect, one can very well be satisfied with what 
the Greek tragedy provides. She has a sister living; I shall have 
her be a little older and married. Her mother could also be 
alive. That these two always remain subordinate characters is, 
of course, taken for granted, as is the fact that tragedy gener- 
ally contains an epic element in the manner of Greek tragedy, 
although this need not be so conspicuous because of that; 
nevertheless, monologue will always play a leading role here, 
even though the situation ought to be of assistance to it. 
Everything must be thought of as focused on this one main 
point of interest that makes up the content of Antigone’s life, 
and when the whole thing is designed in this way, then the 
question is: How is the dramatic interest to be produced? 

As described above, our heroine is on the point of wanting 
to leap over an element in her life; she is beginning to want to 
live altogether spiritually, something that nature does not tol- 
erate. With her depth of soul, when she ever falls in love, she 
is bound to love with an extraordinary passion. So here I come 
to the dramatic interest—Antigone is in love, and I say it with 
pain—Antigone is head over heels in love.** Here, obviously, 
is the tragic collision. Generally there ought to be somewhat 
more discrimination about what is called a tragic collision. 
The more sympathetic the colliding forces are, the more pro- 
found but also the more alike they are, the more momentous 
the collision. So she has fallen in love, and the object of her 
love [Kjerlighed] is not unaware of it. Now, my Antigone is no 
ordinary girl, and her dowry likewise is not ordinary—her 
pain. Without this dowry, she cannot belong to any man— 


The Tragic in Ancient Drama 163 


that, she feels, would be taking too great a risk. To conceal it 
from such an observant person would be impossible; to wish 
to have it concealed would be a breach of her love—but with 
it can she belong to him? Does she dare to confide it to any hu- 
man being, even to the man she loves? Antigone is strong; the 
question is not whether for her own sake, to ease her mind, she 
should confide her pain to someone, for she can very well en- 
dure it without support, but can she defend this to the one who 
is dead? Indeed, by confiding her secret to him, she herself suf- 
fers in a way, for her life is also sadly interwoven in that secret. 
But this does not concern her. The question is only about her 
father. Consequently, from this angle the conflict is of a sym- 
pathetic nature. Her life, which previously was peaceful and 
quiet, now becomes violent and passionate, at all times self- 
contained, of course, and here her lines begin to have pathos. 
She struggles with herself; she has been willing to sacrifice her 
life for her secret, but now her love is demanded as a sacrifice. 
She is victorious—that is, the secret is victorious—and she 
loses. 

Now comes the second collision, because in order for the 
tragic collision to be really profound, the colliding forces must 
be alike. The collision described above does not have this qual- 
ity, for the collision is actually between her love for her father 
and for herself and whether her own love is not too great a sac- 
rifice. The second colliding force is her sympathetic love for 
her beloved. He knows that he is loved and audaciously ven- 
tures upon his offensive. Of course, her reluctance amazes 
him; he perceives that there must be some very strange diffi- 
culties, but not such as to be insurmountable for him. What to 
him is of supreme importance is to convince her of how deeply 
he loves her, indeed, that his life is over if he must give up her 
love. Finally his passion becomes almost unveracious, but 
only more inventive because of this opposition. With every 
protestation of love, he increases her pain; with every sigh, he 
plunges the arrow of grief deeper and deeper into her heart. He 
leaves no means untried to move her. Like everyone else, he 
knows how dearly she loves her father. He meets her at Oed- 
ipus’s grave, where she has gone to pour out her heart, where 


140 


141 


164 Either/Or, I 


she abandons herself to her longing for her father, even if this 
longing is itself mixed with pain because she does not know 
how she is going to meet him again, whether or not he knew 
of his guilt. He surprises her; he beseeches her in the name of 
the love she has for her father. He perceives that he is making 
an extraordinary impression on her; he persists, placing all his 
hope in this means, not knowing that he has actually worked 
against himself. 

The focus of interest here, then, is to extort her secret from 
her. To have her become temporarily deranged and in that 
way to betray it would be of no help. The colliding forces are 
matched to such a degree that action becomes impossible for 
the tragic individual. Her pain is now increased by her love, by 
her sympathetic suffering with the one whom she loves. Only 
in death can she find peace. Thus her life is devoted to grief, 
and she has, so to speak, established a boundary, a dike, 
against the misfortune that perhaps would have fatefully prop- 
agated itself in a following generation. Only in the moment of 
her death can she confess the fervency of her love; only in the 
moment she does not belong to him can she confess that she 
belongs to him. When Epaminondas was wounded in the 
battle at Mantinea, he let the arrow remain in the wound until 
he heard that the battle was won, for he knew that it was his 
death when it was pulled out.® In the same way, our Antigone 
carries her secret in her heart like an arrow that life has contin- 
ually plunged deeper and deeper, without depriving her of her 
life, for as long as it is in her heart she can live, but the instant 
it is taken out, she must die. To take her secret away—this is 
what the lover must struggle to do, and yet it is also her certain 
death. At whose hand does she fall, then? At the hand of the 
living or the dead? °'In a certain sense, at the hand of the dead, 
and what was predicted to Hercules,® that he would be mur- 
dered not by a living person but by a dead one, applies to her, 
inasmuch as the cause of her death is the recollection of her fa- 
ther; in another sense, at the hand of the living, inasmuch as 
her unhappy love is the occasion for the recollection to slay 
her.® 


SILHOUETTES 
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIVERSION! 


Delivered before the 
TVETAEAVEXOMUEVOL 
[Fellowship of the Dead]? 


Abgeschworen mag die Liebe immer seyn; 
Liebes-Zauber wiegt in dieser Héhle 

Die berauschte, tiberraschte Seele 

In Vergessenheit des Schwures ein. 


Gestern liebt’ ich, 
Heute leid’ ich, 
Morgen sterb’ ich; 
Dennoch denk’ ich 
Heut’ und Morgen 
Gern an Gestern 


[Foresworn may love at all times be; 
Love-magic lulls down in this cave 
The soul surprised, intoxicated, 

In forgetfulness of any oath. 


Yesterday I loved, 
Today I suffer, 
Tomorrow I die, 

Yet today and tomorrow 
I like to think 

Of yesterday].° 


EXTEMPORE APOSTROPHE 


We celebrate in this hour the founding of our society; we re- 
Joice anew that the happy occasion has repeated itself, that the 
longest day is over and night begins to triumph. We have 
waited all the day long; just a moment ago we sighed over its 
length, but now our despair is transformed into joy. To be 
sure, the victory is not great, and the preponderance of day 
will last for a long time, but that its domination has been bro- 
ken does not escape our attention. Therefore, we do not post- 
pone our celebration over the victory of the night until it is 
plain to all; we do not postpone it until the torpid bourgeois 
life reminds us that day is declining. No, as a young bride im- 
patiently awaits the coming of night, so we longingly wait for 
the first onset of night, the first announcement of its coming 
victory, and the more we have been inclined to despair over 
our being able to hold out if the days were not shortened, the 
greater our joy and surprise. 

A year has gone by, and our society still survives. Should 
we rejoice over that, dear Lupnagavexempevot, rejoice that its 
existence mocks our doctrine of the downfall of everything, or 
should we not lament instead that it survives and rejoice that 
in any case it has only one year left to continue, for if it has not 
vanished within that time, was it not our decision to dissolve 
it ourselves? In founding it, we did not make farsighted plans; 
too familiar with the wretchedness of life and the perfidious- 
ness of existence, we resolved to come to the aid of universal 
law and obliterate ourselves if it does not forestall us. A year 
has gone by and our society is still intact; as yet no one has been 
released, no one has released himself, since every one of us is 
too proud for that, because we all regard death as the greatest 
good fortune. Should we rejoice over this and not rather be sad 


145 


146 


147 


168 Either/Or, I 


and take pleasure only in the hope that life’s confusion will 
soon split us up, that the storms of life will soon carry us off! 
Surely these thoughts are better suited to our society, are more 
in agreement with the festivity of the moment, with the entire 
setting. For is it not ingenious and significant that the floor of 
this little room is strewn, as is the local custom, with foliage, 
as if for a funeral; and is not nature itself giving us its approval 
when we take note of the wild storm raging around us, when 
we pay heed to the wind’s powerful voice? Yes, let us be silent 
for a moment and listen to the music of the storm, its spirited 
course, its bold challenge, and the defiant roar of the sea and 
the uneasy sighing of the forest and the desperate crashing of 
the trees and the faint sibilating of the grass. To be sure, people 
do say that the voice of the divine is not in the driving wind 
but in the soft breeze,* but our ears, after all, are constructed 
not to pick up the soft breezes but to swallow the uproar of the 
elements. And why does it not rage even more violently and 
put an end to life and the world and this short speech, which at 
least has the merit exceeding everything else that it is soon 
ended. Yes, would that the vortex, which is the world’s core 
principle,® even if people are not aware of it but eat and drink, 
marry and propagate themselves with carefree industrious- 
ness, would that it might erupt with deep-seated resentment 
and shake off the mountains and the nations and the cultural 
works and man’s clever inventions; would that it might erupt 
with the last terrible shriek that more surely than the trumpet 
of doom announces the downfall of everything; would that it 
might stir and spin this bare cliff on which we stand as light as 
thistledown before the breath in its nostrils. The night, how- 
ever, is being victorious, the day is shortening, and hope is 
growing! So fill your glasses once again, fellow topers; with 
this goblet I toast you, silent night, the eternal mother of 
everything! From you comes everything; to you everything 
returns. Have mercy again on the world; open up once again 
to gather in everything and keep us all safe in your womb! I 
greet you, dark night, I greet you as the victor, and this is my 
comfort, for in eternal oblivion you shorten everything, day 
and time and life and the irksomeness of recollection! 


Silhouettes 169 


Since the time when Lessing defined the boundaries be- 
tween poetry and art in his celebrated treatise Laokoon,® it no 
doubt may be regarded as a conclusion unanimously recog- 
nized by all estheticians that the distinction between them is 
that art is in the category of space, poetry in the category of 
time, that art depicts repose, poetry motion.’ For this reason, 
the subject for artistic portrayal must have a quiet transparency 
so that the interior rests in the corresponding exterior. The less 
this is the case, the more difficult becomes the task for the art- 
ist, until the distinction asserts itself and teaches him that this 
is no task for him at all. 

If we apply to the relation between sorrow and joy that 
which has been casually stated but not developed here, it is 
easy to perceive that joy is far easier to depict artistically than 
sorrow. By no means does this deny that grief can be depicted 
artistically, but it certainly does say that there comes a point 
where it is essential to posit a contrast between the interior and 
the exterior, which makes a depiction of it impossible for art. 
This in turn is due to the singular nature of sorrow. By nature, 
joy wishes to disclose itself; sorrow wishes to conceal itself, in- 
deed, at times even to deceive. Joy is communicative, sociable, 
open, wishes to express itself. Sorrow is inclosingly reserved 
[indesluttet], silent, solitary, and seeks to return into itself. 
Surely no one who has made life the object of any observation 
at all will deny the correctness of this. There are people whose 
make-up is so constituted that when their emotions are stirred 
the blood rushes to the surface of the skin, and in this way the 
interior motion becomes visible in the exterior; others are so 
constituted that the blood recedes, withdraws into the heart 
chamber and the inner parts of the organism. It is somewhat 
like this with respect to the mode of expressing joy and sor- 
row. The first make-up described is much easier to observe 
than the second. In the first, one sees the manifestation; the in-~ 
terior motion is visible in the exterior. In the second, one has 
an intimation of the interior motion. The exterior pallor is, as 
it were, the interior’s good-bye, and thought and imagination 
hurry after the fugitive, which hides in the secret recesses. This 
applies particularly to the kind of sorrow I shall consider more 


148 


149 


170 Either/Or, I 


explicitly here, what could be called reflective sorrow. Here 
the exterior has at most only a suggestion that puts one on the 
track, sometimes not even that much. This sorrow cannot be 
depicted artistically, for the interior and the exterior are out of 
balance, and thus it does not lie within spatial categories. In yet 
another respect it cannot be depicted artistically, for it does 
not have inner stillness but is constantly in motion; even if this 
motion does not enrich it with new effects, the motion itself is 
nevertheless the essential. Like a squirrel in its cage, it turns 
around in itself, yet not as uniformly as does that animal, but 
with a continual alternation in the combination of the interior 
elements of sorrow. What excludes reflective sorrow as the 
subject for artistic depiction is that it lacks repose, is not at one 
with itself, does not come to rest in any one definite expres- 
sion. Just as the patient in his pain tosses from one side to the 
other, so reflective sorrow is tossed about in order to find its 
object and its expression. If the sorrow is in repose, the interior 
of sorrow will gradually work its way outward, become visi- 
ble in the exterior, and in this way become a subject for artistic 
depiction. If sorrow has inner repose and rest, the motion be- 
gins outward from the inside; reflective sorrow moves in- 
ward, like blood rushing from the outer surface, and lets one 
have an intimation of it only because of the fleeting pallor. Re- 
flective sorrow does not involve any essential change in the ex- 
terior; even in the first moment of sorrow it hurries inward, 
and only the more careful observer has an intimation of its dis- 
appearance; later it carefully sees to it that the exterior is as in- 
conspicuous as possible. 

By withdrawing inward in this way, it finally finds an inclo- 
sure, an innermost retreat, where it thinks it can remain, and 
now it begins its uniform movement. Like the pendulum in a 
clock, it swings back and forth and cannot find rest. It contin- 
ually begins from the beginning and deliberates anew, inter- 
rogates the witnesses, checks and examines the various state- 
ments, something it has already done hundreds of times, but it 
is never finished. In the course of time, the uniformity has 
something anesthetizing about it. Just as the uniform dripping 
of rain from the roof, the uniform whirring of a spinning 


Silhouettes 171 


wheel, and the monotonous sound of a man pacing back and 
forth with measured steps on the floor above have an anesthe- 
tizing effect, so reflective grief eventually finds solace in this 
motion, which as an illusory motion becomes a necessity for 
it. At last there is a kind of balance; the need to give vent to the 
grief, insofar as it may ever have asserted itself at all, ceases; the 
exterior is calm and quiet; and deep within, in its little nook, 
grief lives like a well-guarded prisoner in an underground 
prison, who lives on year after year in his uniform movement, 
walking to and fro in his cubbyhole, never weary of traveling 
the long or short road of sorrow. 

Reflective sorrow can be occasioned in part by the individ- 
ual’s subjective quality, in part by the objective sorrow or the 
occasion of the sorrow. A morbidly reflective individual will 
transform every sorrow into a reflective sorrow; his individual 
make-up and structure render it impossible for him to assimi- 
late the sorrow right away. But this is a morbidity that cannot 
be of particular interest to us, because in that way every acci- 
dentality can undergo a metamorphosis by which it becomes a 
reflective sorrow. It is another matter when the objective sor- 
row or the occasion of the sorrow in the individual himself 
fosters the reflection that makes the sorrow into a reflective 
sorrow. This is everywhere the case when the objective sor- 
row in itself is not finished, when it leaves a doubt, whatever 
its nature is. Here at once a great multiplicity appears for 
thought, greater according to the richness of one’s life and ex- 
perience or one’s inclination to engage one’s keenness in such 
imaginary constructions. 

But it is by no means my intention to go through the whole 
multiplicity; I want to single out only one aspect as it has ap- 
peared for my observation. If the occasion for sorrow is a de- 
ception, then the objective sorrow itself is of such a quality 
that it engenders reflective sorrow in the individual. That a de- 
ception is actually a deception is often very difficult to deter- 
mine clearly, and yet everything depends upon that. As long 
as this is debatable, the sorrow will find no repose but must 
continue to ramble back and forth in reflection. Furthermore, 
if this deception does not involve anything external but a per- 


150 


172 Either/Or, I 


son’s whole inner life, his life’s innermost core, the probability 
of the continuance of the objective sorrow becomes greater 
and greater. But what can more truthfully be called a woman’s 
life than her love? Consequently, if the sorrow of an unhappy 
love is due to a deception, we have unconditionally a reflective 
sorrow, whether it continues for a lifetime or the individual 
conquers it. Unhappy love is in itself undoubtedly the deepest 
sorrow for 2 woman, but it does not follow from this that 
every unhappy love engenders a reflective sorrow. If, for ex- 
ample, the beloved dies, or she perhaps does not find her love 
returned at all, or her life situation makes the fulfillment of her 
wish impossible, this certainly is an occasion for sorrow, but 
not a reflective sorrow, except to the extent that the person 
concerned was morbid before, and then she thereby lies out- 
side our interest. But if she is not morbid, then her sorrow be- 
comes an immediate sorrow and as such can also become the 
subject of artistic portrayal, whereas on the other hand it is im- 
possible for art to express and portray the reflective sorrow or 
the point of it. In other words, immediate sorrow is the im- 
mediate imprint and expression of the sorrow’s impression, 
which, just like the picture Veronica® preserved on her linen 
cloth, is perfectly congruous, and sorrow’s sacred lettering is 
stamped on the exterior, beautiful and clear and legible to all. 

Reflective sorrow, then, cannot become a subject for artistic 
portrayal. For one thing, it is never really present but is contin- 
ually in the process of becoming; for another, the exterior, the 
visible, is a matter of unimportance and indifference. So if art 
will not limit itself to the naiveté (examples are found in old 
books) in which a figure is portrayed that can represent almost 
anything, but one discovers on its breast a plaque, a heart or 
something similar, on which one may read everything, espe- 
cially when the figure’s posture draws a person’s attention to 
it, even points to it, an effect that could just as well be achieved 
by writing above it “Please note!’’—if art will not do this, it 
will be obliged to reject pictures of that kind and leave reflec- 
tive grief to poetic or psychological treatment. 

It is this reflective sorrow that I aim to single out and, as far 
as possible, have emerge in a few pictures. I call them silhou- 


Silhouettes 173 


ettes [Skyggerids],° partly to suggest at once by the name that I 
draw them from the dark side of life and partly because, like 
silhouettes, they are not immediately visible. If I pick up a sil- 
houette, I have no impression of it, cannot arrive at an actual 
conception of it; only when [ hold it up toward the wall and do 
not look at it directly but at what appears on the wall, only 
then do I see it. So it is also with the picture I want to show 
here, an interior picture that does not become perceptible until 
I see through the exterior. Perhaps there is nothing striking 
about the exterior, but when I look through it, only then do I 
discover the interior picture, which is what I want to show, an 
interior picture that is too delicate to be externally perceptible, 
since it is woven from the soul’s faintest moods. If I look at a 
sheet of paper, it perhaps has nothing remarkable about it for 
immediate inspection, but as soon as I hold it up to the light of 
day and look through it, I discover the subtle interior picture, ° 
too psychical, as it were, to be seen immediately. 

So fasten your gaze, dear Zupnagavexedmpevot, on this inte- 
rior picture; do not let yourselves be distracted by the exterior, 
or, more correctly, do not produce it yourselves, for I shall 
continually draw it aside in order to penetrate better into the 
interior. But presumably I do not need to encourage this soci- 
ety, of which I have the honor to be a member, to do this, for 
although we are young, we nevertheless are all old enough not 
to let ourselves be deceived by the exterior or to stop with that. 
Would I be indulging in a vain hope if I believed that you will 
do these pictures the honor of your attention, or would my ef- 
forts be foreign and of no consequence to you, not in harmony 
with the interest of our society, a society that knows but one 
passion, namely, sympathy with sorrow’s secret. 

As a matter of fact, we, too, form an order; we, too, now 
and then go out into the world like knights-errant, each his 
own way, not to fight monsters or come to the aid of inno- 
cence or be tried in amorous adventures. All this is of no con- 
cern to us, not even the last, for the arrow in a woman’s eye 
does not wound our hardened breasts, and the cheery smiles of 
happy maidens do not move us, but rather the secret hint of 
grief. Let others be proud that no gir] anywhere can resist their 


151 


152 


174 Either/Or, I 


erotic power; we envy them not. We shall be proud that no se- 
cret sorrow escapes our attention, that no solitary sorrow is so 
prudish and so proud that we do not succeed in penetrating its 
innermost hideout! Which contest is the most dangerous, 
which requires the most skill and provides the greatest pleas- 
ure, we shall not investigate. Our choice is made: we love only 
sorrow. We are in quest only of sorrow, and wherever we find 
its trail, we follow it, fearlessly, unwaveringly, until it dis- 
closes itself. For this fight we equip ourselves; we practice 
fighting daily. 

It is true that sorrow sneaks about in the world so very se- 
cretively that only the person who has sympathy for it gains 
an intimation of it. One walks down the street; one house 
looks like the other. Only the experienced observer suspects 
that in this particular house things are quite otherwise at the 
midnight hour; then an unhappy person paces about, one who 
found no rest; he goes up the stairs, and his footsteps echo in 
the stillness of the night. People pass one another in the street; 
one person looks just like the next, and the next one is like al- 
most everyone else. Only the experienced observer suspects 
that deep within that one’s head resides a lodger who has noth- 
ing to do with the world but lives out his solitary life in quiet 
home-industry work. 

The exterior, then, is indeed the object of our scrutiny but 
not of our interest. In the same way, the fisherman sits and 
looks fixedly at the float; the float, however, does not interest 
him at all, but rather the movements down at the bottom. 
Therefore the exterior does indeed have significance for us, 
but not as a manifestation of the interior, but rather as a tele- 
graphic report that there is something hidden deep within. 

When one looks long and attentively at a face, sometimes 
another face, as it were, is discovered within the face one sees. 
Ordinarily this is an unmistakable sign that the soul is hiding 
an emigrant who has withdrawn from the exterior face in or- 
der to watch over a buried treasure, and the route for the op- 
eration of observation is suggested by the fact that the one face 
seems to be within the other, which indicates that one must try 
to penetrate inward if one wants to discover anything. The 


Silhouettes 175 


face, which usually is the mirror of the soul, here takes on an 
ambiguity that cannot be artistically portrayed and that usu- 
ally lasts only for a fleeting moment. It takes a special eye to 
see it, a special vision to pursue this unerring indication of se- 
cret sorrow. This vision is avid and yet so scrupulous, alarm- 
ing, and compelling, and yet so sympathetic, persevering, and 
cunning, and yet so honest and well disposed; it lulls the indi- 
vidual into a sort of pleasant lassitude in which he finds a sen- 
sual pleasure in pouring out his sorrow, similar to the sensual 
pleasure in bleeding to death. The present is forgotten, the ex- 
terior is penetrated; the past is resurrected, sorrow’s breathing 
is eased. The person who is grieving finds relief, and the sym- 
pathetic knight of grief rejoices over having found what he 
sought, for we seek not the present but the past, not joy, for it 
is always present, but sorrow, for its nature is to pass by, and 
in the present moment we see it just as we see a person when 
we catch sight of him for just a moment and then he turns 
down another street and disappears. 

But sometimes the sorrow conceals itself even better, and 
the exterior allows us to suspect nothing, not the slightest. It 
can elude our attention for a long time, but when by chance a 
look, a word, a sigh, a tone in the voice, a hint in the eyes, a 
trembling of the lips, or a blunder in the handshake treacher- 
ously betrays what has been carefully concealed—then passion 
is aroused, then the struggle begins. Then it is a matter of hav- 
ing vigilance and perseverance and sagacity, for who is as in- 
ventive as secret sorrow, but a solitary lifetime prisoner has 
adequate time to think up many things, and who 1s as swift to 
find concealment as secret sorrow, for no young girl can cover 
in greater anxiety and haste a bosom she has exposed than hid- 
den sorrow when it is surprised. Then unshakable dauntless- 
ness is required, for the struggle is with a Proteus,’ but he 
must give up if one only holds out. Even if like that sea god he 
assumed every shape in order to escape, such as a snake twist- 
ing in our hands, a lion terrifying us with its roaring, changed 
into a tree that whispers with its leaves or into roaring water 
or a crackling fire—at last he must nevertheless prophesy, and 
sorrow must disclose itself at last. See, these adventures are 


153 


154 


176 Either/Or, I 


our delight, our diversion; to try ourselves in them is our 
knighthood. For that purpose, we arise in the middle of the 
night like robbers; this is why we risk everything, for no pas- 
sion is as wild as the passion of sympathy. And we need not 
fear that there will be a lack of adventures for us but rather fear 
collision with opposition that is too hard and impregnable, for 
just as natural scientists report that in blasting boulders that 
have defied the centuries they have found deep within a living 
creature that, undiscovered, has maintained life, so also it is in- 
deed possible that there are human beings whose exterior is a 
firm-as-rock hill that guards their forever hidden life of sor- 
row. This, however, will not temper our passion or cool our 
zeal; on the contrary, it will inflame it, because our passion, 
after all, is not curiosity that satisfies itself with the exterior 
and the superficial but is a sympathetic anxiety that searches 
the minds?” and hidden thoughts, conjures forth what is hid- 
den by means of witchcraft and invocations, even that which 
death has withheld from our gaze. It is said that Saul, before 
the battle, came in disguise to a fortune teller and demanded 
that she show him Samuel’s image." It surely was not only cu- 
riosity that impelled him, not a desire to see Samuel’s visible 
image, but he wanted to know his thoughts, and he undoubt- 
edly waited uneasily until he heard the rigorous judge’s cen- 
sorious voice. Likewise it surely will not simply be curiosity 
that moves one or another of you, my dear Zupmagavexew- 
wEVOL, to contemplate the pictures ] am going to show you. 
Although I designate them with specific poetic names, by no 
means is it suggested thereby that it is only these poetic figures 
who appear before you, but the names must be regarded as 
nomina appellativa [common nouns], and from my side there is 
nothing to hinder any one of you, if you feel inclined, from 
giving a particular picture another name, a more appealing 
name, or a name that perhaps comes more naturally to you. 


1. Marie Beaumarchais 


The girl taken as our subject is known to us in Goethe’s Cla- 
vigo,'* except that we shall follow her a little further in time, 
when she has lost dramatic interest, when the accompani- 


Silhouettes 177 


ments of sorrow have gradually abated. We shall continue to 
follow her, for we, knights of sympathy, have just as much in- 
nate gift as acquired skill in being able to keep step in proces- 
sion with sorrow. 

Her story is brief: Clavigo became engaged to her; Clavigo 
left her. This information is enough for the person who is in 
the habit of observing the phenomena of life as one observes 
rarities in a curio cabinet; the shorter the better, the more one 
can manage to see. In the same way, it could be told very 
briefly that Tantalus thirsts and that Sisyphus rolls a stone up 
the mountain.'5 If someone is in a hurry, it would indeed be a 
delay to dwell on it any further, since one cannot learn any 
more than one already knows, which is the whole thing. 
Whatever is to claim more attention must be of another kind. 
A group of intimates is gathered around the tea table. The 
samovar is singing its last verse, and the hostess asks the mys- 
terious stranger to unburden his heart. With that in mind, she 
has sugar-water and jam brought in, and now he begins. It is a 
long, prolix story. So it goes in novels, and it is also something 
quite different: a prolix story and such a brief little announce- 
ment. Whether it is a brief story for Marie Beaumarchais is an- 
other question. One thing is sure; it is not prolix, for a prolix 
story nevertheless has a measurable length, but a short story 
sometimes has the mysterious quality that despite all its brev- 
ity it is longer than the most prolix. 

In what has been stated in the foregoing discussion, I have 
already pointed out that reflective grief does not become visi- 
ble in the exterior, that is, it does not find its beautiful, com- 
posed expression therein. The interior unrest does not permit 
this transparency, and the exterior is more likely to be con- 
sumed thereby; insofar as the interior would declare itself in 
the exterior, it would likely be a kind of morbidity, which can 
never become a subject for artistic portrayal, since it does not 
have the interest of the beautiful. Goethe has suggested this by 
a few particular hints.'® But even if there is agreement on the 
correctness of this observation, there could be a temptation to 
regard it as something incidental, and not until one is assured, 
by deliberating purely poetically and esthetically, that what 


[ 
156 


178 Either/Or, I 


the observation states has esthetic truth, not until then will one 
gain a deeper consciousness. Now, if I were to imagine a re- 
flective sorrow and asked if it could not be portrayed artisti- 
cally, it would immediately be apparent that the exterior is al- 
together incidental to it; but if this is true, then artistic beauty 
is abandoned. Whether she is large or small, significant or in- 
significant, beautiful or not so beautiful, this is of no conse- 
quence; to deliberate on whether it would be more proper to 
have her incline her head to this side or to that or toward the 
ground, to have her gaze gloomily or sadly fix her eyes on the 
ground—all this is utterly inconsequential; the one expresses 
the reflective sorrow no more adequately than the other. In 
comparison with the interior, the exterior has become insig- 
nificant and inconsequential. The point in reflective sorrow is 
that the sorrow is continually seeking its object; this seeking is 
the sorrow’s restlessness and its life. But this seeking is a con- 
tinual fluctuation, and if at every moment the exterior were a 
perfect expression of the interior, then there would have to be 
a whole series of pictures in order to portray reflective sorrow; 
but no particular picture would express the sorrow, and no 
particular picture would have real artistic value, since it would 
be not beautiful, but true. These pictures must be looked at in 
the way one looks at the second hand of a watch; one does not 
see the works, but the interior movement expresses itself con- 
tinually in the continually changing exterior. But this change- 
ableness cannot be portrayed artistically, and yet this is the 
point of the whole thing. 

If, for example, unhappy love is due to a deception, then its 
pain and suffering are that the grief cannot find its object. If the 
deception is proved and the person concerned has perceived 
that it is a deception, the sorrow certainly does not cease, but 
then it is an immediate sorrow, not a reflective sorrow. Here 
the dialectical difficulty is obvious, for what is she sorrowing 
over? If he was a deceiver, then it was indeed good that he left 
her, the earlier the better; she should rejoice over it instead and 
sorrow because she had loved him, and yet it is a deep sorrow 
that he was a deceiver. But whether it is a deception is the rest- 
lessness in sorrow’s perpetuum mobile. To establish certainty for 


Silhouettes 179 


the external fact that a deception is a deception is always very 
difficult, and yet that by no means ends the matter or stops the 
movement. For love [Kjerlighed], a deception is indeed an ab- 
solute paradox, and therein lies the necessity of a reflective 
grief. The different factors in love may be amalgamated in the 
individual in very different ways, and thus love in one person 
may not be the same as in another; the egotistical may be dom- 
inant, or the sympathetic. But whatever the love is in its sep- 
arate elements and also in its totality, a deception is a paradox 
that it cannot think, and yet one that it eventually wants to 
think. Indeed, if the egotistic or the sympathetic element is 
present absolutely, the paradox is canceled; that is, in the 
power of the absolute, the individual is beyond reflection. To 
be sure, he does not think the paradox in the sense that he can- 
cels it by a reflective ‘‘how,” but he is saved precisely by not 
thinking it; he is not concerned with reflection’s busy reports 
or confusions—he reposes in himself. Because of its pride, the 
egotistically proud love regards a deception as impossible; it is 
not concerned with finding out what can be said for or against, 
how the person concerned can be defended or excused; it is ab- 
solutely sure, because it is too proud to believe that anyone 
would dare to deceive it. Sympathetic love possesses the faith 
that can move mountains; for it, any defense is nothing com- 
pared with its unshakable conviction that it was no deception. 
Every charge proves nothing to the advocate, who explains 
that it was no deception, explains it not this way or that—but 
absolutely. But a love like that is seldom seen in this life, or 
perhaps never. Usually both factors are present in love, and 
this brings it into relation to the paradox. In the two instances 
described, the paradox indeed exists for love but does not con- 
cern it; in the latter instance, the paradox exists for love. The 
paradox is unthinkable, and yet love wants to think it, and, in 
accordance with the momentary predominance of the various 
factors, it makes an approach in order to think it, often in con- 
tradictory ways, but it does not succeed. This path of thinking 
is infinite and does not end until the individual arbitrarily 
breaks it off by affirming something else, by a determination 
of the will; but the individual thereby enters into ethical qual- 


157 


158 


180 Either/Or, I 


ifications and does not engage us esthetically. By a resolve, it 
attains what it cannot attain on the road of reflection: an end, 
repose. 

This holds for every unhappy love that is due to a deception. 
What may evoke reflective grief even more in Maria Beaumar- 
chais is that it is only an engagement that has been broken. An 
engagement is a possibility, not an actuality; but precisely be- 
cause it is only a possibility, it may seem that the effects of 
being broken are not so great, that it is far easier for the indi- 
vidual to bear this blow. This may indeed be the case at times, 
but on the other hand the circumstance that it is only a possi- 
bility that is destroyed entices much more reflection. When an 
actuality is shattered, the break is usually far more radical; 
every nerve is cut, and the break as a break has an implicit 
completeness. When a possibility is shattered, the momentary 
pain may not be as great, but frequently it also leaves a little 
ligament or two whole and undamaged, which remains a con- 
stant occasion for continued pain. The destroyed possibility 
appears transfigured in a higher possibility, whereas the temp- 
tation to conjure up a new possibility such as this is not as great 
when it is an actuality that has been shattered, because the ac- 
tuality is higher than the possibility. 

So Clavigo has left her, has perfidiously severed the connec- 
tion. Accustomed to leaning on him, she does not have the 
strength to stand when he thrusts her away, and she collapses 
weakly into the arms of those around her. This seems to be 
Marie’s situation. However, another beginning is also con- 
ceivable; it is conceivable that immediately at the outset she 
had sufficient strength to transform her sorrow into reflective 
sorrow, that she—either to avoid the humiliation of hearing 
others talk about her having been deceived or because she 
nevertheless still thought so highly of him that it would hurt 
her to hear him denounced again and again as a deceiver— 
promptly severed all connections with others in order to con- 
sume the sorrow in herself and to consume herself in the sor- 
row. 

We follow Goethe. Those around her are not unsympa- 
thetic; they feel her pain with her, and in feeling it they say: 


Silhouettes 181 


This will be the death of her. Esthetically speaking, this is al- 
together correct. An unhappy love may be of such a nature 
that suicide may be regarded as esthetically proper, but then it 
must not have been due to a deception. If that is the case, then 
the suicide would lose all loftiness and involve a concession 
that pride must refuse to give. If, however, it is the death of 
her, this is the same as saying that he has murdered her. This 
expression harmonizes entirely with her powerful inner agi- 
tation; she finds alleviation in it. 

But life does not always follow precisely esthetic categories, 
does not always obey an esthetic norm, and she does not die. 
This places those around her in an awkward position. They 
sense that it is inappropriate to go on declaring that she is 
going to die when she continues to live; in addition, they do 
not feel able to do it with the same pathos-filled energy as at 
the beginning, and yet this was a prerequisite if there was to be 
any solace for her. So they change their method. He was a vil- 
lain, they say, a deceiver, an abominable person not worth 
dying for. Forget him; don’t give this thing another thought; 
it was only an engagement. Blot this incident out of your rec- 
ollection, and once again you are young, can hope again. This 
incites her, for this pathos of wrath harmonizes with her other 
moods; her pride finds satisfaction in the vengeful idea of 
changing the whole thing into a nothing. It was not because he 
was an extraordinary person that she loved him, far from it; 
she was very aware of his faults, but she believed he was a 
good man, a faithful man, and that was why she loved him. It 
was out of compassion, and therefore it will be easy to forget 
him, because she never really needed him. 

Marie and those around her are once again in tune, and the 
duet between them goes beautifully. Those around her do not 
find it difficult to believe that Clavigo was a deceiver, for they 
had never loved him, and therefore there is no paradox. Inso- 
far as they perhaps had liked him (something Goethe suggests 
with respect to the sister),!® this very interest arms them 
against him, and this kindly disposition, which perhaps was 
little more than kindness, becomes superb inflammable stuff 
to sustain the flames of hate. Nor do those around her find it 


I 
159 


182 Either/Or, I 


difficult to blot out the recollection of him, and therefore they 
demand that Marie do the same. Her pride breaks forth in hate; 
those around her add fuel to the flames. She finds relief in vi- 
olent words and vigorous, drastic intentions and becomes self- 
intoxicated with them. Those around her are pleased. They do 
not perceive—something she will scarcely admit to herself— 
that in the next moment she is weak and listless; they do not 
perceive that she is gripped by the anxious presentiment that 
the energy she has at a particular moment is an illusion. This 
she carefully hides and confesses to no one. Those around her 
continue their theoretical exercises successfully but neverthe- 
less begin to want to see tokens of practical effects. They fail 
to appear. 

Those around her continue to incite her; her words manifest 
interior strength, and yet they have a suspicion that there is 
something wrong. They become impatient, risk the extreme; 
they drive the spurs of ridicule into her side in order to drive 
her from cover. It is too late. Misunderstanding has entered in. 
That he actually was a deceiver entails no humiliation for those 
around her, but it certainly does for Marie. The revenge of- 
fered her, to scorn him, does not really mean very much, be- 
cause in order for it to mean something he would have to love 
her, but that he certainly does not do, and her contempt be- 
comes a check that no one will cash. On the other hand, in 
Clavigo’s being a deceiver there is nothing painful for those 
around her, but there certainly is for Marie, and he still does 
not totally lack a defender in her inner being. She feels that she 
has gone too far; she has hinted at a strength she does not pos- 
sess; she will not admit it. And what consolation is there in 
scorning him? Then it is better to grieve. In addition, she has 
in her possession a secret note or two of great importance for 
clarification of the text but also of such a nature as to place him 
in a more favorable or more unfavorable light according to the 
circumstances. She has not, however, initiated anyone into 
this and does not wish to do so, for if he was not a deceiver, 
then it would still be conceivable that he would repent of this 
step and come back or, even more glorious, that he perhaps 
would not need to repent of it, that he could completely justify 


Silhouettes 183 


himself or explain everything. In that case, it might become an 
offense if she had made use of it; then the old relationship could 
never be re-established, and it would be her own fault, for it 
was she who had shared with others his love’s most secret 
growth with others. And if she could really be convinced that 
he was a deceiver, well, then nothing mattered anyway, and in 
any case it would be most gracious of her not to make use of 
it. 

In this way, those around her have been instrumental, 
against their will, in developing a new passion in her, jealousy 
for her own sorrow. Her decision is made; on every score 
those around her lack the energy to harmonize with her pas- 
sion—she takes the veil. She does not enter the convent, but 
she takes the veil of sorrow, which hides her from every alien 
glance. Outwardly she is quiet. The whole affair is forgotten; 
her words give no hint. She herself takes the vow of sorrow, 
and now she begins her lonely, hidden life. At the same mo- 
ment, everything is changed; previously it seemed to her as if 
she could speak with others, but now she is not only bound by 
the vow of silence that her pride extorted from her with the 
consent of her love, or that her love required and her pride 
sanctioned, but now she does not know at all where she is to 
begin, or how, and this is not because new factors have inter- 
vened but because reflection has triumphed. If anyone were 
now to ask her what she was sorrowing over, she would have 
nothing to reply, or she would reply in the same way as that 
sage!? who was asked what religion is, and he asked for time 
to think, and more time to think, and thus the reply was al- 
ways due. Now she is lost to the world, lost to those around 
her, immured alive; sadly she closes the last opening. She feels 
that even at this moment it was perhaps possible to become 
open; the next moment she is forever removed from them. 
But it is decided, unshakably decided, and she does not need to 
fear—as is usual with one who is immured alive—that when 
the scanty ration of bread and water provided her is used up 
she will perish, for she has nourishment for a long time. She 
does not need to fear boredom; she indeed does have some- 
thing to occupy her. Her exterior is quiet and calm, has noth- 


161 


184 Either/Or, I 


ing remarkable about it, and yet her inner being is not the in- 
corruptible essence of a quiet spirit?® but the barren busyness 
of a restless spirit. She seeks solitude or its opposite. In soli- 
tude, she relaxes from the strain always required in forcing her 
exterior into a particular form. Just as someone who has been 
standing or sitting for a long time in a forced position pleas- 
urably stretches his body, just as a branch that has long been 
bent by force and then, when the bond is broken, joyfully 
takes its natural position again, so also does she find refresh- 
ment. Or she seeks the opposite, noise and diversion, in order 
to be safely preoccupied with herself while everyone else’s at- 
tention is led to other things, and what is going on around her, 
the sounds of music, the noisy conversation, sounds so distant 
that it seems as if she were sitting in a little room by herself, 
remote from the whole world. And if she perhaps cannot force 
back the tears, then she is sure to be misunderstood; then per- 
haps she cries herself out, for when one lives in an ecclesia pressa 
[persecuted church], it is truly a joy that one’s divine service 
harmonizes in its mode of expression with the public mode. 
She fears only the quieter sociality, for here she is less un- 
guarded; here it is so easy to make a blunder, so difficult to pre- 
vent its being noticed. 

Outwardly, then, there is nothing to be detected, but in- 
wardly there is bustling activity. Here an interrogation is tak- 
ing place that with perfect right and special emphasis may be 
called the third degree; everything is brought out and scrupu- 
lously examined—his figure, his facial expression, his voice, 
his words. It is said that it has sometimes happened that an in- 
terrogator, during a third degree such as this, has been capti- 
vated by the beauty of the accused, has halted the interroga- 
tion, and has been unable to continue it. The court expectantly 
awaits the result of his interrogation, but it fails to come, and 
yet it is not at all because the interrogator is neglecting his 
duty. The jailer can testify that he reports every night, that the 
accused is brought in, that the interrogation lasts several 
hours, that during his term there has never been an interroga- 
tor as persevering as this official. The court draws the conclu- 
sion from all this that it must be a very complicated case. So it 


Silhouettes 185 


goes with her—not just once, but again and again. Everything 
is presented just as it happened, trustworthily; it demands jus- 
tice—and love. 

The accused is summoned: ‘‘There he comes, he is turning 
the corner, he is opening the wicket. See how he hurries; he 
has longed for me; it is as if he threw everything aside in order 
to come to me as soon as possible. I hear his quick footsteps, 
faster than my heartbeats; he is coming, there he is’ —and the 
interrogation: it is postponed. 

“Good Lord, that little phrase—I have repeated it so often to 
myself, recalled it amid many other things, but I have never 
paid attention to what is really concealed in it. Yes, it explains 
everything. He is not in earnest about leaving me; he is coming 
back. What is the whole world compared with this little 
phrase. People became tired of me. I did not have a friend, but 
now I have a friend, a confidant, a little phrase that explains 
everything. —He returns; he does not look down; he looks at 
me half reproachfully and says: O you of little faith,?' and this 
little phrase is poised like an olive leaf? on his lips—he is 
there’”’—and the interrogation is postponed. 

Under such circumstances, it is quite in order that there are 
enormous difficulties involved in passing judgment. A young 
girl, of course, is not a jurist, but it by no means follows that 
she cannot pass judgment, and yet this young girl’s judgment 
will always be such that although at first glance it is a judg- 
ment, it also contains something more that shows that it is no 
judgment, and also shows that the very next moment a com- 
pletely opposite judgment may be passed. “‘He was no de- 
ceiver, because in order to be that, he would have had to be 
conscious of it himself from the beginning, but that he was 
not; my heart tells me that he loved me.” If the concept of a 
deceiver is advanced in this way, then perhaps, when all is said 
and done, a deceiver has never lived. To acquit him for this 
reason shows an interest in the accused that is incompatible 
with strict justice and cannot stand up against a single objec- 
tion. “He was a deceiver, an abominable person, who coldly 
and heartlessly has made me inordinately unhappy. Before I 
knew him, I was satisfied. Yes, it is true that I had no idea that 


162 


163 


186 Either/Or, I 


I could be so happy or that there was such a wealth in joy as he 
taught me, but neither did I have any idea that I could become 
as unhappy as he has taught me to be. Therefore I will hate 
him, abominate him, curse him. Yes, I curse you, Clavigo; in 
the secrecy of my soul I curse you. No one must know it; I 
cannot allow anyone else to do it, for no one but me has the 
right to do it. I have loved you as no one else has, but I also 
hate you, for no one knows your cunning as I do. You good 
gods, to whom revenge belongs, entrust it to me for a little 
while; I will not misuse it, I will not be cruel. Then I will steal 
into his soul when he wants to love another—not in order to 
kill this love; that would be no punishment, for I know that he 
loves her just as little as he loved me. He does not love people 
at all; he loves only ideas, thoughts, his powerful influence at 
court, his intellectual power—I cannot imagine how he can 
love all these things. I will take it all away from him; then he 
will learn to know my pain. When he is on the verge of de- 
spair, I will give it all back to him again, but he will have me 
to thank for it—and then I shall be avenged. 

“No, he was no deceiver. He did not love me anymore; that 
is why he left me, but that, after all, was no deception. If he 
had stayed with me without loving me, then he would have 
been a deceiver; then like a pensioner I would have lived on the 
love he once had had, lived on his pity, on the mite he perhaps 
even generously had thrown to me, lived as a burden to him 
and a torture to myself. Shame on you, wretched, cowardly 
heart; hold yourself in contempt; learn to be great, learn it 
from him; he has loved me better than I have understood how 
to love myself. And I should be angry with him? No, I will go 
on loving him because his love was stronger, his thoughts 
prouder, than my weakness and my cowardliness. And per- 
haps he even still loves me—yes, it was for love of me that he 
left me. 

“Yes, now I see it; now I no longer doubt—he was a de- 
ceiver. I saw him: he looked proud and exultant; he surveyed 
me with a mocking glance. At his side was a Spanish girl, lux- 
uriant in beauty. Why was she so beautiful—I could murder 
her—why am I not just as beautiful? And was I not? —I did not 


Silhouettes 187 


know it, but he taught it to me—and why am [no longer beau- 
tiful? Who is to blame for it? Curse you, Clavigo! If you had 
stayed with me, I would have become even more beautiful, for 
my love and, along with it, my beauty increased through your 
words and your assurances. Now | am faded; now I thrive no 
longer. Compared with a word from you, what power does 
the tenderness of the whole world have? Oh, would that I 
were beautiful once again; would that I could please him once 
again, because only for that reason do I want to be beautiful. 
Oh, would that he were no longer able to love youth and 
beauty; then I shall lament more than before, and who can la- 
ment as I do! 

“Yes, he was a deceiver. Otherwise, how could he stop lov- 
ing me? Have I, then, stopped loving him? Is there not the 
same law for a man’s love as for a woman’s? Or is a man sup- 
posed to be weaker than the weak? Or did he perhaps make a 
mistake; was it perhaps an illusion that he loved me, an illusion 
that disappeared like a dream—is this befitting in a man? Or 
was it fickleness; is it befitting for a man to be fickle? Why, 
then, did he assure me in the beginning that he loved me so 
much? If love cannot last, what, then, can last? Yes, Clavigo, 
you have robbed me of everything, my faith, my faith in love, 
not just in your love! 

““He was no deceiver. What snatched him away, I do not 
know; I do not know that dark power, but it pained him per- 
sonally, pained him deeply. He did not want to initiate me into 
his pain; therefore he pretended to be a deceiver. Indeed, if he 
had taken up with another girl, then I would say he was a de- 
ceiver, then no power on earth would bring me to believe any- 
thing else, but that he has not done. He thinks perhaps that 
making himself appear to be a deceiver will diminish the pain 
for me, will arm me against him. Therefore he appears now 
and then with young girls, therefore he looked at me so mock- 
ingly the other day—to make me furious and thereby to lib- 
erate me. No, surely he was no deceiver, and how could that 
voice deceive? It was so calm and yet so agitated; it sounded 
from an inwardness, the depth of which I could scarcely sus- 
pect, as ifit were breaking a path through masses of rock. Can 


164 


165 


188 Either/Or, I 


that voice deceive? What is the voice, then—is it a stroke of the 
tongue, a noise that one can produce as one wishes? But it 
must have a home somewhere in the soul; it must have a birth- 
place. And that it did, in the innermost recess of his heart it had 
its home; there he loved me, there he loves me. To be sure, he 
had another voice also; it was cold, chilling; it could murder 
every joy in my soul, squelch every joyous thought, make 
even my kiss cold:and abhorrent to me. Which was the true 
voice? He could deceive in every way, but this I feel—that 
tremulous voice in which his whole passion throbbed—that 
was no deceit; it is impossible. The other was a deception. Or 
there were evil forces that gained control of him. No, he was 
no deceiver; that voice that has shackled me to him forever— 
that is no deception. A deceiver he was not, even though I 
never understood him.” 

The interrogation she will never finish, nor the judgment, 
either—the interrogation, because there are always interrup- 
tions; the judgment, because it is only a feeling. Once this 
movement begins, it can go on as long as it pleases, and there 
is no end in sight. Only by a break can it be brought to a halt— 
that is, by her cutting short this whole movement of thought; 
but this cannot happen, for the will is continually in the service 
of reflection, which energizes the momentary passion. 

When at times she wants to tear herself away from all this, 
wants to reduce it to nothing, this is again only a mood, a mo- 
mentary passion, and reflection continually goes on being the 
victor. Mediation is impossible; if she wants to begin so that 
this beginning in one way or another is a result of the opera- 
tions of reflection, then at the same moment she is swept 
away. The will must be altogether impartial, must begin in the 
power of its own willing; only then can there be any question 
of a beginning. If this happens, then she certainly can begin, 
but then she falls outside our concern entirely, then we gladly 
turn her over to the moralists or to whoever else wants to take 
an interest in her. We wish her an honorable marriage and 
promise to dance on her wedding day, when fortunately the 
changed name will bring us to forget that it was the Marie 
Beaumarchais of whom we have spoken. 


Silhouettes 189 


But we return to Marie Beaumarchais. As stated above, her 
sorrow is characterized by the restlessness that prevents her 
from finding the object of her sorrow. Her pain cannot find 
quiet; she lacks the peace that is necessary for any life if it is to 
be able to assimilate its nourishment and be refreshed by it; no 
illusion overshadows her with its quiet coolness as she absorbs 
the pain. She lost childhood’s illusion when she acquired that 
of erotic love; she lost erotic love’s illusion when Clavigo de- 
ceived her; if it were possible for her to acquire sorrow’s illu- 
sion, she would be helped. Then her grief would attain mas- 
culine maturity, and she would be compensated for her loss. 
But her sorrow does not thrive, for she has not lost Clavigo— 
he has deceived her. Her sorrow always remains a tiny wailing 
infant, a fatherless and motherless child, for if Clavigo had 
been taken from her, then the child would have had a father in 
the recollection of his faithfulness and love and a mother in 
Marie’s ardor. She has nothing on which she can bring it up, 
because what she experienced was beautiful, to be sure, but it 
had no significance in and by itself but only as a foretaste of the 
future. And she cannot hope that this child of pain will be 
transformed into a son of joy; she cannot hope that Clavigo 
will return, for she will not have the strength to endure a fu- 
ture. She has lost the happy trust with which she would have 
accompanied him dauntlessly into the abyss, and she has ac- 
quired instead a hundred misgivings; at most she would only 
be able to live through the past with him once again. At the 
time Clavigo left her, a future lay before her, a future so beau- 
tiful, so enchanting, that it almost confused her thoughts; it 
obscurely exerted its power over her. Her metamorphosis had 
already begun; then the process was interrupted, her transfor- 
mation stopped. She had had intimations of a new life, had 
sensed its powers stir within her; then it was broken off and 
she was repulsed, and there is no recompense for her, neither 
in this nor in the future world. That which was to come smiled 
upon her very generously and mirrored itself in the illusion of 
her erotic love, and yet everything was so natural and direct. 
Perhaps a weak reflection has sometimes painted for her a 
weak illusion that does not affect her temptingly but probably 


166 


167 


190 Either/Or, I 


is soothing for a moment. Time will go on for her in this 
way—until she has consumed the very object of her sorrow, 
which was not identical with her sorrow but the occasion for 
her continually seeking an object of her sorrow. 

If a person possessed a letter that he knew or believed con- 
tained information about what he had to consider his life’s 
happiness, but the characters were thin and faint and the hand- 
writing almost illegible, then, presumably with anxiety and 
agitation, he would read it most passionately again and again 
and at one moment derive one meaning, at the next moment 
another, according to how he would explain everything by a 
word he believed that he had deciphered with certainty, but he 
would never progress beyond the same uncertainty with 
which he had begun. He would stare, more and more anx- 
iously, but the more he stared, the less he would see. His eyes 
would sometimes be filled with tears, but the more frequently 
this happened to him, the less he would see. In the course of 
time, the writing would become fainter and less legible; finally 
the paper itself would crumble away, and he would have noth- 
ing left but tear-filled eyes. 


2. Donna Elvira 


We come to know this girl through the opera Don Giovanni, 
and it will not be unimportant to our subsequent exploration 
to note in the piece the clues to her earlier life. She was a nun; 
it is from the peacefulness of a convent that Don Giovanni has 
snatched her.** This suggests the staggering intensity of her 
passion. This was no silly molly from a finishing school who 
has learned to love at school, to flirt at parties; whether such a 
one is seduced is not very important. Elvira, on the other 
hand, has been brought up under the discipline of the convent, 
which has not succeeded in rooting out her passion but pre- 
sumably has taught her to suppress it and thereby to make it 
even more violent as soon as it is allowed to burst forth. She is 
sure prey for a Don Giovanni; he will know how to coax out 
the passion—wild, ungovernable, insatiable, to be satisfied 
only in his love. In him she has all, and the past is nothing; if 
she leaves him, she loses all, the past also. She had renounced 


Silhouettes 191 


the world; then there appeared a figure she cannot renounce, 
and that is Don Giovanni. From now on, she renounces every- 
thing in order to live with him. The more meaningful that was 
which she leaves, the more firmly must she cling to him; the 
more firmly she has embraced him, the more terrible becomes 
her despair when he leaves her. From the very outset, her love 
is a despair; nothing has meaning for her, neither in heaven nor 
on earth, except Don Giovanni. 

Elvira is of interest to us in the opera only insofar as her re- 
lation to Don Giovanni is of significance to him. If I were to 
suggest her significance in a few words, I would say that she is 
Don Giovanni's epic fate, and the Commendatore is his dra- 
matic fate. There is in her a hatred that will seek out Giovanni 
in every nook, a flame of fire that will illuminate the darkest 
hiding place, and if she should still not discover him, then 
there is in her a love that will find him. She joins the others in 
pursuing Don Giovanni, but if I imagined that all the forces 
were neutralized, that his pursuers’ endeavors canceled one an- 
other so that Elvira was alone with Don Giovanni and he was 
in her power, the hate would arm her to murder him. But her 
love would forbid it, not out of compassion, because to her he 
is too great for that, and thus she would continually keep him 
alive, for if she killed him she would kill herself. Conse- 
quently, if there were in the piece no forces in motion against 
Don Giovanni except Elvira, it would never end, for Elvira 
herself would prevent, if possible, even the lightning from 
striking him, in order to take revenge herself, and yet again she 
would be unable to take revenge. Such is her interest for us in 
the piece, but here we are concerned only with her relation to 
Don Giovanni insofar as it has meaning for her. She is the ob- 
ject of interest to many, but in very different ways. Don Gio- 
vanni is interested in her before the opera begins; the spectator 
bestows on her his dramatic interest; but we friends of grief, 
we accompany her not only to the nearest cross street, not 
only in the moment when she walks across the stage—no, we 
accompany her on her solitary way. 

So, then, Don Giovanni has seduced Elvira and has forsaken 
her; this is speedily done, as quickly “as the tiger breaks a 


168 


169 


192 Either/Or, I 


lily.”5 If there are 1,003 in Spain alone, one is able to see that 
Don Giovanni is in a hurry and can more or less reckon the 
speed of the operation. Don Giovanni has forsaken her, but 
there is no circle of friends into whose arms she can collapse in 
a swoon. She need not fear that they will surround her too 
closely—indeed, they know very well how to open ranks in 
order to expedite her departure. She need not fear that anyone 
will argue her out of her loss—instead someone may take it 
upon himself to demonstrate it. She stands alone and forsaken, 
and no doubt tempts her; it is clear that he was a deceiver who 
has divested her of everything and abandoned her to infamy 
and disgrace. Esthetically speaking, however, this is not the 
worst for her; for a brief time, it rescues her from reflective 
sorrow, which is surely more painful than immediate grief. 
Here the fact is indubitable, and reflection cannot come along 
and change it now to this and now to that. A Marie Beaumar- 
chais may have loved a Clavigo just as ardently, just as wildly 
and passionately; in relation to her passion, it may be an alto- 
gether accidental circumstance that the worst has not hap- 
pened; she can almost wish that it had, for then there would be 
an end to the story, then she would be far better armed against 
him, but that did not happen. The fact she has before her is far 
more doubtful; its real nature always remains a secret between 
her and Clavigo. When she thinks of the cold cunning, the 
shabby commonsensicality it took to deceive her in such a way 
that it does not look so bad in the eyes of the world, so that she 
becomes prey to the sympathy that says, ““Well, good Lord, it 
isn’t so terrible,’ she is shocked, she can almost go insane at 
the thought of the proud superiority for which she has meant 
nothing at all, which has set a limit for her and said, “Up to 
here and no further.”’ And yet the whole thing can also be ex- 
plained in another, a more beautiful, way. But as the explana- 
tion changes, the fact itself also changes. Thus, reflection im- 
mediately has plenty to do, and reflective sorrow is 
inescapable. 

Don Giovanni has forsaken Elvira; everything is clear to her 
at once. No doubt coaxes sorrow into reflection’s parlor; she 
falls silent in her despair. With a single pulsebeat it streams 


Silhouettes 193 


through her, and its streaming is outward; in a blaze the pas- 
sion shines through her and becomes visible externally. Hate, 
despair, revenge, love—all burst forth to manifest themselves 
visibly. At this moment she is pictorial. We immediately see a 
picture of her in our imagination, and here the exterior is not 
without significance, reflection over it is not without sub- 
stance, and its activity is not without meaning as it sorts and 
chooses. 

Whether she herself at this moment is a subject for artistic 
portrayal is another matter, but this much is certain: at this 
moment she is visible and can be seen—not, of course, in the 
sense that this or that actual Elvira can actually be seen, which 
frequently is tantamount to not being seen, but the Elvira we 
imagine is visible in her essentiality. Whether art is capable of 
depicting the nuances of expression in her face to such a degree 
as to make visible the substance of her despair, I shall not de- 
cide; but she can be described, and the picture that emerges be- 
comes not merely a burden for memory, which does not mat- 
ter one way or another, but has its validity. 

And who has not seen Elvira! It was early one morning that 
I started a walking tour in one of Spain’s romantic regions. 
Nature was waking up. The trees in the forest shook their 
heads, and the leaves rubbed, so to speak, the sleep out of their 
eyes; one tree leaned toward the other to see whether it was out 
of bed yet, and the whole forest undulated in the cool, fresh 
breeze. A light fog rose from the earth; the sun snatched it 
away as if it were a blanket under which the earth had rested at 
night and now like a fond mother gazed down on the flowers 
and every living thing and said: Get up, dear children; the sun 
is already shining. As | wound my way through a deep moun- 
tain pass, my eyes fell on a cloister high up on the top of the 
mountain, to which a footpath led with many bends. My 
mind lingered on it—there it lies, I thought, like a house of 
God firmly grounded on the rock. My guide told me it was a 
convent known for its strict discipline. My pace slackened and 
my thoughts also, and what indeed is there to hurry after when 
one is so near the cloister? I probably would have come to a 
complete stop if I had not been aroused by a rapid movement 


170 


171 


194 Etther/Or, I 


nearby. Involuntarily I turned around; it was a knight who 
hastened past me. How handsome he was, his step so light and 
yet so vigorous, so royal and yet so fugitive; he turned his head 
to look back, his face so captivating and yet his glance so rest- 
less. It was Don Giovanni. Is he hurrying to a rendezvous, or 
is he coming from one! 

But soon he disappeared from my eyes and was gone from 
my thoughts; my gaze concentrated upon the cloister. Once 
again I was absorbed in contemplation of the lust of life and the 
serene peace of the cloister, when high up on the mountain I 
saw a female figure. In great haste she came running down the 
footpath, but the way was steep, and she continually seemed 
about to plunge down the mountain. She came closer. Her face 
was pallid, but her eyes were frightfully ablaze. Her body was 
exhausted; her bosom rose and fell violently, and yet she hur- 
ried faster and faster. Her ruffled hair flew loosely in the wind, 
but even the brisk morning air and her hurried pace were not 
able to bring color to her cheeks. Her nun’s veil was torn and 
fluttered behind her; her thin white dress would have betrayed 
much to a profane gaze if the passion in her face had not drawn 
to itself the attention of even the most corrupt of men. She 
rushed past me; I did not dare speak to her—her brow was too 
majestic, her glance too royal, her passion too highborn for 
that. Where did this girl belong? In the cloister? Do these pas- 
sions belong there—in the world? This dress—why is she run- 
ning? Is it to hide her shame and disgrace, or to catch up with 
Don Giovanni? She runs into the forest, and it closes around 
her and hides her, and I see her no more but hear only the sigh- 
ing of the forest. Poor Elvira! Have the trees found out—and 
yet the trees are better than people, for trees sigh and are silent: 
people whisper. 

In this first moment, Elvira can be portrayed, and even if art 
does not really deal with such things because it will be difficult 
to find a unity of expression that also has all the multiplicity of 
her passions, the soul nevertheless demands to see her. I have 
tried to suggest this by the little picture I outlined above; it was 
not that I thought she was thereby portrayed, but I wanted to 


Silhouettes 195 


suggest that her being described was quite correct, that it was 
not a capricious whim on my part but a valid claim of the idea. 
But this is only one element, and therefore we must accom- 
pany Elvira further. 

The movement nearest at hand is a movement in time. 
Through a series of moments in time, she keeps herself at the 
almost picture-like peak suggested above. She thereby ac- 
quires dramatic interest. With the speed whereby she rushed 
past me, she catches up with Don Giovanni. This, too, is quite 
appropriate, for he did forsake her, but he has swept her along 
into the momentum of his own life, and she must reach him. 
If she does reach him, all her attention is once again directed 
outward, and we still do not have reflective sorrow. She has 
lost all—heaven when she chose the world, the world when 
she lost Giovanni. Therefore she has nowhere to turn except 
to him; only by being in his presence can she hold off despair, 
either by stifling the inner voices with the uproar of hate and 
rage, which sound in full force only when Don Giovanni is 
personally present, or by hoping. The latter already hints that 
the elements of reflective sorrow are present, but as yet they 
are unable to find time to consolidate inwardly. ‘First she 
must be cruelly convinced,”’ so it says in Kruse’s adaptation,”’ 
but this requirement completely betrays the inner disposition. 
If what has happened has not convinced her that Giovanni was 
a deceiver, then she will never be convinced. But as long as she 
demands additional evidence, she will succeed in avoiding the 
inner turmoil of quiet despair by means ofa restless roving life 
perpetually engaged in a pursuit of Don Giovanni. The para- 
dox is already there before her soul, but as long as she can keep 
her soul in a state of agitation by means of external evidence 
that is not supposed to explain the past but throw light on Don 
Giovanni’s present condition, she does not have reflective 
grief. Hate, bitterness, curses, entreaties, and beseeching alter- 
nate, but her soul has still not returned into itself in order to 
repose in the thought that she has been deceived. She is ex- 
pecting an explanation from the outside. When, therefore, 
Kruse has Don Giovanni say: 


172 


173 


196 Either/Or, I 


are you now disposed to hear, 
To take my word—you who suspect me; 
Then I can almost say, almost improbable 
Appears the cause that compelled etc., 


we must guard against thinking that what sounds like mock- 
ery to the spectator’s ear has the same effect on Elvira. To her, 
these words are refreshing, for she demands the improbable, 
and she will believe it precisely because it is improbable. 

If we now have Don Giovanni and Elvira collide, then we 
have the choice between having Don Giovanni be the stronger 
or Elvira. If he is the stronger, then her whole behavior means 
nothing. She demands “evidence in order to be cruelly con- 
vinced”’; he is sufficiently gallant not to let it fail to appear. But 
she naturally is not convinced and demands new evidence, be- 
cause demanding evidence is a relief, and the uncertainty is re- 
freshing. She then becomes just one more witness to Don Gio- 
vanni’s achievements. But we could also imagine Elvira as the 
stronger. That seldom happens, but out of gallantry toward 
the fair sex we shall do it. She is, then, still in her full beauty— 
it is true that she has wept, but the tears have not quenched the 
gleam in her eyes; and it is true that she has sorrowed, but sor- 
row has not ravaged her youthful luxuriance; and it is true that 
she has grieved, but her grief has not gnawed away at the vi- 
tality of her beauty; and it is true that her cheeks have become 
pallid, but the expression is therefore all the more soulful; and 
it is true she does not move with the lightness of childlike in- 
nocence, but she does step forth with the energetic firmness of 
feminine passion. 

This is how she encounters Don Giovanni. She has loved 
him more than the whole world, more than her soul’s salva- 
tion; she has cast away everything for him, even her honor, 
and he was unfaithful. Now she knows only one passion— 
hate; only one thought—revenge. Thus, she is just as great as 
Don Giovanni, because seducing all the maidens means for the 
man the same as for the woman—to let herself be seduced once 
and for all, heart and soul, and then to hate—or, if you please, 
to love her seducer with an energy that no married woman 


Silhouettes 197 


has. This is how she encounters him. She does not lack the 
courage to venture out against him; she is not fighting for 
moral principles, she is fighting for her love, a love she does 
not base on respect; she is not fighting to become his mate, she 
is fighting for her love, and this is not satisfied with a contrite 
faithfulness but demands revenge. Out of love of him, she has 
cast away her salvation—if it were offered her again, she 
would again cast it away in order to avenge herself. 

Such a character can never fail in its desired effect upon Don 
Giovanni. He knows the pleasure of inhaling the finest and 
most fragrant flower of early youth; he knows that it is just for 
a moment, and he knows what comes later; too often he has 
seen these pallid figures wither so quickly that it was almost 
visible. But here something wondrous has happened; the laws 
for the usual course of existence have been broken. He has se- 
duced a young girl, but her life has not been extinguished, her 
beauty has not faded—she is transformed and is more beautiful 
than ever. He cannot deny it; she enthralls him more than any 
other girl has, more than Elvira herself, for despite all her 
beauty, the innocent nun was just another girl, his infatuation 
just another experience—but this girl is the only one of her 
kind. This girl is armed; she does not hide a dagger in her 
breast,28 but she does wear armor—not visible, for her hate is 
not satisfied by speeches and declamations, but invisible, and 
it is her hatred. Don Giovanni’s passion is aroused; she must 
be his once again, but this does not happen. Indeed, if she who 
hated him were a girl who knew his villainy, although she her- 
self had not been deceived by him, then Don Giovanni would 
conquer. But this girl he cannot win; all his seduction is pow- 
erless. Even if his voice were more insinuating than his own 
voice, his advances craftier than his own advances, he would 
not move her; even if the angels pleaded for him, even if the 
Mother of God were to be the bridesmaid at the wedding, it 
would be futile. Just as in the underworld Dido herself turns 
away from Aeneas,”? who was unfaithful to her, so she cer- 
tainly will not turn away from him but will face him even 
more coldly than Dido. 

But this meeting of Elvira and Don Giovanni is only a tran- 


174 


198 Either/Or, I 


sitional moment; she walks across the stage, the curtain falls, 
but we, dear Zupnagavexempevor, we quietly follow her, for 
only now does she really become the true Elvira. As long as 
she is in the vicinity of Don Giovanni, she is beside herself; 
when she comes to herself, it is appropriate to think about the 
paradox. Despite all the assurances of modern philosophy and 
the rash courage of its young ascribers, there are always great 
difficulties involved in thinking a contradiction.*° Presumably 
a young girl will be forgiven for finding it difficult, and yet 
this is the task assigned her—to think that the one she loves 
was a deceiver. She has this in common with Marie Beaumar- 
chais, and yet there is a difference in the way in which each of 
them comes to the paradox. The fact Marie had for her starting 
point was intrinsically so dialectical that reflection, with all its 
concupiscence, had to grasp it at once. As for Elvira, the fac- 
tual evidence that Don Giovanni was a deceiver seems so ob- 
vious that it is hard to see how reflection can take hold of it. 
Therefore, it grasps the matter from another angle. Elvira has 
lost everything, and yet a whole life lies before her, and her 
soul requires money for living expenses. 

Here two possibilities become apparent—either to enter 
into ethical and religious categories or to keep her love for 
Giovanni. If she does the first, she is outside our interest; we 
will gladly have her enter a home for fallen women or what- 
ever else she wants. But this probably will also be difficult for 
her, because in order for that to be possible she must first de- 
spair; she has once known the religious, and the second time it 
makes great demands. On the whole, the religious is a danger- 
ous power with which to become involved; it is jealous of it- 
self and does not allow itself to be mocked. When she chose the 
convent, her proud soul perhaps found rich satisfaction in it, 
because, say what you will, no girl makes as brilliant a match 
as she who espouses heaven; but now, on the other hand, now 
she will have to return penitently, in repentance and contri- 
tion. Furthermore, there is always the question whether she 
can find a priest who can proclaim the gospel of repentance 
and contrition with the same pithiness as Don Giovanni has 
proclaimed the glad tidings of pleasure. Consequently, to save 


Silhouettes 199 


herself from this despair, she must cling to Don Giovanni’s 
love, which is all the easier for her to do since she does still love 
him. 

A third possibility is unthinkable; that she could be able to 
find consolation in another man’s love would be even more 
dreadful than the most dreadful. So for her own sake, there- 
fore, she must love Don Giovanni; it is self-defense that bids 
her do it. And this is the stimulus of reflection that forces her 
to stare at this paradox: whether she is able to love him even 
though he deceived her. Every time despair is about to seize 
her, she takes refuge in the memory of Don Giovanni’s love, 
and in order really to feel comfortable in this refuge, she is 
tempted to think that he is no deceiver, even though she does 
this in various ways. A woman’s dialectic is remarkable, and 
only the person who has had the opportunity to observe it can 
imitate it, whereas the greatest dialectician who ever lived 
could speculate himself crazy trying to produce it. 

Ihave been fortunate enough, however, to know a few out- 
standing examples of this and through them have had a com- 
plete course in dialectics. Oddly enough, one would expect to 
find them most likely in the metropolis, for the noise and the 
throngs of people conceal much, but that is not the case—that 
is, if one wishes to have the perfect type. The finest ones are to 
be found in the provinces, in small towns, in country houses. 
The one I am thinking about in particular was a Swedish lady, 
a maiden of noble birth. Her first lover could not have desired 
her more ardently than I, her second lover, tried to pursue the 
thought processes of her heart. But I owe it to the truth to ad- 
mit that it was not my keenness and ingenuity that gave me the 
clue, but an accidental circumstance that is too complicated to 
tell here. She had lived in Stockholm and there had come to 
know a French count to whose faithless charm [Elskverdighed] 
she became a victim. I can still see her vividly. The first time I 
saw her, she really did not make any impression on me. She 
was still lovely, proud and aristocratic of bearing; she did not 
say very much, and I probably would have gone away no 
wiser than I came if chance had not made me a party to her se- 
cret. From that moment on, she was important to me; she 


175 


176 


200 Either/Or, I 


gave me such a vivid picture of an Elvira that I could never 
weary of looking at her. 

One evening I was at a large party with her. I had arrived 
before she did, had already been waiting some time when I 
stepped to the window to see whether she was coming, and a 
moment later her carriage stopped at the door. She stepped 
out, and immediately her attire made a singular impression on 
me. She was wearing a thin, light silk coat, much like the 
domino in which Elvira appears at the dance in the opera. She 
entered with a grand dignity that was really impressive. She 
was wearing a black silk gown; she was dressed with the ut- 
most taste and yet quite simply. No jewels embellished her; 
her neck was unadorned; and since her skin was whiter than 
snow, I have hardly ever seen so beautiful a contrast as that be- 
tween her black dress and her white bosom. One frequently 
sees an unadorned neck, but seldom does one see a girl who 
really has a bosom. She curtsied to all the guests, and when the 
master of the house came forward to greet her, she curtsied 
very low to him; although her lips parted in a smile, I did not 
hear a word from her. To me her conduct was very fitting, and 
I, who shared her secret, silently associated with her the words 
about the oracle: otte Aéyet otte xovmter, GAG onuatver 
[neither speaks nor conceals but indicates].*! 

I have learned much from her and, among other things, 
have had confirmed my frequently made observation that peo- 
ple who conceal a sorrow acquire in the course of time a single 
phrase or a single idea with which they are able to signify 
everything to themselves and to the individual they have ini- 
tiated into it. Compared with the prolixity of sorrow, such a 
phrase or idea is like a diminutive, like a pet name one employs 
for daily use. Frequently it has an entirely accidental relation to 
what it is supposed to signify and almost always owes its ori- 
gin to an accidental circumstance. Having won her confi- 
dence, having succeeded in overcoming her mistrust of me be- 
cause a chance event had placed her in my power, having had 
her tell me everything, I frequently went through the whole 
scale of moods with her. But if she was not so disposed and yet 
wanted to give me a hint that her soul was engrossed in her 


Silhouettes 201 


grief, she would take me by the hand, look at me and say: I 
was more slender than a reed, he more glorious than the cedars 
of Lebanon.*? Where she had found these words I do not 
know, but I am convinced that whenever Charon comes with 
his boat to take her over to the underworld, he will find not the 
required obol® in her mouth but these words on her lips: I was 
more slender than a reed, he more glorious than the cedars of 
Lebanon! 

So, then, Elvira cannot find Don Giovanni, and now, all by 
herself, she must manage to discover the way out of the com- 
plication in her life; she must come to herself. She has changed 
her environment, and thus the help is gone that perhaps would 
have contributed to drawing out her sorrow. Her new envi- 
ronment knows nothing of her earlier life, suspects nothing, 
for there is nothing striking or remarkable about her external 
appearance, no mark of sorrow, no sign that announces to 
people that there is sorrowing here. She can control every 
expression, for the loss of her honor can very well teach her 
that; and even though she does not prize people’s opinions 
very highly, she at least can spare herself their condolences. 

So now everything is in order, and she can be rather sure of 
going through life without arousing the suspicions of the cu- 
rious populace, who ordinarily are just as stupid as they are cu- 
rious. She has legitimate and unchallenged possession of her 
sorrow, and only if she were to be so unfortunate as to en- 
counter a professional smuggler, only then would she have to 
fear a closer interrogation. What is going on within her? Is she 
sorrowing? Of course, she is! But how is this grief to be char- 
acterized? I would call it care for the necessities of life, because 
a person’s life, after all, does not consist only of food and 
drink. The soul, too, requires sustenance. She is young, and 
yet the reserves of her life are used up, but from this it does not 
follow that she will die. In this respect, she is concerned every 
day about the next day. She cannot stop loving him, and yet 
he deceived her, but if he deceived her, then her love has in- 
deed lost its nourishing power. Yes, if he had not deceived her, 
if a higher power had torn him away, then she would have 
been as well provided as any girl could wish, for the memory 


{ 
177 


178 


202 Either/Or, I 


of Don Giovanni was a good deal more than many a living 
husband. But if she gives up her love, then she is brought to 
the state of beggary, then she must return to the convent to 
ridicule and disgrace. Yes, if only she could buy his love again 
with this! In this way she goes on living. Today, this present 
day, she still thinks that she can endure, that there is still a little 
something left to live on, but the next day, that she fears. She 
deliberates again and again, grasps at every escape, and yet she 
finds none, and thus she never comes to grieve coherently and 
healthfully, for she continually searches for the way she is 
going to grieve. 

“Forget him, that is what I want; rip his picture out of my 
soul; I want to ransack myself like a consuming fire, and every 
thought that belongs to him must be burned up; only then can 
I be saved; it is in self-defense. If 1 do not rip out every thought 
of him, even the most remote, I am lost; only in this way can 
I protect myself. Myself—what is this myself—wretchedness 
and misery. I was unfaithful to my first love, and now should 
I make up for it by being unfaithful to my second? 

“No, I will hate him; that is the only way to satisfy my soul, 
the only way I can find rest and something to occupy me. I will 
braid a garland of curses out of everything that reminds me of 
him, and for every kiss I say: Cursed be you! And for every 
time he has embraced me: Ten times cursed be you! And for 
every time he swore he loved me, I will swear that I will hate 
him. This is going to be my work, my labor; to this I dedicate 
myself. After all, I became accustomed to praying my rosary 
in the convent, and so I will still remain a nun who prays early 
and late. Or should I perhaps be satisfied that he once loved 
me? I should perhaps be a prudent girl and not throw him 
away in proud contempt now when I know that he is a de- 
ceiver; I should perhaps be a good housewife who, with eco- 
nomic sense, knows how to stretch as far as possible the little 
that she has. No, I will hate him; only in that way can I tear 
myself away from him and show myself that I do not need 
him. But am I not indebted to him at all when I hate him? Am 
I not living off him? For what is it that nourishes my hatred 
except my love for him? 


Silhouettes 203 


‘He was no deceiver; he had no idea of what a woman can 
suffer. If he had had that, he never would have forsaken me. 
He was a man who was to himself enough. Is that, then, a con- 
solation for me? Indeed it is, for my suffering and anguish 
prove to me how happy I was, so happy that he has no idea of 
it. Why, then, do I complain because a man is not like a 
woman, not as happy as she is when she is happy, not as un- 
happy as she is when she is boundlessly unhappy because her 
happiness knew no bounds. 

“Did he deceive me? No! Did he promise me anything? No! 
My Giovanni was no suitor, no poor chicken thief; a nun does 
not debase herself for such. He did not ask my hand in mar- 
riage; he stretched out his hand, and I grasped it; he looked at 
me, I was his; he opened his arms, I belonged to him. I clung 
to him; I entwined myself around him like a climbing plant; I 
rested my head on his breast and gazed into that all-powerful 
countenance, with which he ruled the world, and which 
nevertheless rested upon me as if I were the whole world to 
him; like a suckling infant I imbibed fullness and richness and 
bliss. Can I demand more? Was I not his? Was he not mine? 
And if he was not, was I therefore the less his? When the gods 
wandered upon the earth and fell in love with women, did 
they remain faithful to their beloveds? And yet it occurs to no 
one to say that they deceived them! And why not? Because we 
want a girl to be proud of having been loved by a god. And 
what are all the gods of Olympus compared with my Gio- 
vanni? And should I not be proud—should I disparage him, 
should I insult him in my thought, allow it to force him into 
the narrow, wretched laws that apply to ordinary men? No, I 
will be proud that he has loved me; he was greater than the 
gods, and I will honor him by making myself into a nobody. I 
will love him because he belonged to me, love him because he 
forsook me, and I will go on being his, and I will keep what he 
throws away. 

“No, I cannot think about him; every time I recall him, 
every time my thoughts approach the hiding place in my soul 
where his memory lives, then it is as if ] committed a new sin. 
I fee] an anxiety, an unspeakable anxiety, an anxiety such as I 


179 


180 


204 Either/Or, I 


felt in the convent when I sat in my solitary cell and waited for 
him and my thoughts terrified me: the prioress’s intense scorn, 
the convent’s terrible punishment, my offense against God. 
And yet was not this anxiety part of it? What was my love for 
him without it? Indeed, he was not married to me; we had not 
received the blessing of the Church; the bell had not rung for 
us; no hymn was sung—and yet what was all the music and 
celebration of the Church; how would it be able to put me ina 
mood comparable to this anxiety! —But then he came, and the 
disharmony of my anxiety dissolved into the most blissful har- 
mony of security, and only faint tremblings voluptuously 
stirred my soul. Should I fear this anxiety, then; does it not re- 
mind me of him; is it not the announcement of his coming? If 
I could recollect him without this anxiety, then I would not 
recollect him. He is coming; he asks for silence; he controls the 
spirits that want to tear me away from him; I am his, blissful 
in him.” 

If I were to imagine a person in distress at sea, unconcerned 
about his life, remaining on board because there was some- 
thing he wanted to save and could not save because of perplex- 
ity about what to save, I have an image of Elvira. She is in dis- 
tress at sea; her destruction is imminent, but it does not 
concern her; she is not aware of it; she is perplexed about what 
she should save. 


3. Margarete 


We know this girl from Goethe’s Faust. She was a little mid- 
dle-class girl, not destined, like Elvira, for the convent, but 
still she was brought up in the fear of the Lord, even though 
her soul was too childlike to feel the earnestness, as Goethe so 
incomparably says: 


Halb Kinderspiel[e], 

Halb Gott im Herzen 
[Half sport of childhood, 
Half God within thee]. 


What we particularly love about this girl is the charming 
simplicity and humility of her pure soul. The first time she sees 


Silhouettes 205 


Faust, she immediately feels much too inferior to be loved by 
him, and it is not out of curiosity to know whether Faust loves 
her that she picks the petals of the daisy—it is out of humility, 
for she feels too inferior to choose and therefore submits to the 
oracular bidding of an enigmatic power. Yes, lovable Marga- 
rete! Goethe betrayed how you plucked the petals and recited 
the words: He loves me, he loves me not.*6 Poor Margarete! 
You can indeed continue this activity and merely change the 
words: He deceived me, he deceived me not. In fact, you can 
cultivate a little piece of ground with this kind of flower and 
you will have manual labor for your whole life. 
Commentators have remarked on the striking fact that 
whereas the legend of Don Juan tells of 1,003 seduced in Spain 
alone, the legend of Faust speaks of only one seduced girl. It 
may be worth the trouble not to forget this observation, inas- 
much as it will be of significance in what follows and will help 
us characterize what is distinctive in Margarete’s reflective sor- 
row. At first glance, it might seem that the only difference be- 
tween Elvira and Margarete was the difference between two 
different individualities who have experienced the same thing. 
But the difference is far more essential and yet is due not so 
much to the difference in the two feminine natures as to the es- 
sential difference between a Don Juan and a Faust. From the 
very start, there must be a difference between an Elvira and a 
Margarete, since a girl who is to make an impression on a 
Faust must be essentially different from a girl who makes an 
impression on a Don Juan. Yes, even if I supposed that it was 
the same girl who engaged the attention of both, it would be 
something different that appealed to each of them. By being 
brought into relation with a Don Juan or a Faust, the difference 
that was present only as a possibility would develop into a full 
actuality. Faust is admittedly a reproduction of Don Juan, but 
his being a reproduction is precisely what makes him essen- 
tially different from him, even in the stage of life in which he 
can be called a Don Juan, for to reproduce another stage does 
not mean only to become that but to become that with all the 
elements of the preceding stage in it. Therefore, even if he de- 
sires the same as a Don Juan, he nevertheless desires it in a dif- 


181 


182 


206 Either/Or, I 


ferent way. But in order for him to be able to desire it in a dif- 
ferent way, it must also be present in a different way. He has 
features that make his method different, just as Margarete has 
features that make another method necessary. His method in 
turn depends upon his desire, and his desire is different from 
Don Juan’s, even if there is a basic similarity between them. 
Generally, people think they are saying something very sa- 
gacious when they emphasize that Faust ends up by becoming 
a Don Juan, and yet it does not say very much, for the point is, 
in what sense does he become that. Faust is a demonic figure, 
just like a Don Juan, but a superior one. Sensuousness does not 
acquire importance for him until he has lost a whole previous 
world, but the consciousness of this loss is not blotted out; it is 
always present, and therefore he seeks in the sensuous not so 
much pleasure as distraction. His doubting soul finds nothing 
in which it can rest, and now he grasps at erotic love [Elskov], 
not because he believes in it but because it has an element of 
presentness in which there is a momentary rest and a striving 
that diverts and that draws attention away from the nothing- 
ness of doubt. His pleasure, therefore, does not have the Hei- 
terkeit [cheerfulness] that characterizes a Don Juan. His visage 
is not smiling, his brow not unclouded, and joy is not his es- 
cort; the young girls do not dance into his embrace, but he 
scares them to himself. What he is seeking, therefore, is not 
only the pleasure of the sensuous but the immediacy of the 
spirit. Just as ghosts in the underworld, when a living being 
fell into their hands, sucked his blood and lived as long as this 
blood warmed and nourished them, so Faust seeks an imme- 
diate life whereby he will be rejuvenated and strengthened. 
And where can this better be found than in a young girl, and 
how can he more completely imbibe this than in the embrace 
of erotic love? Just as the Middle Ages had tales of sorcerers 
who knew how to prepare a rejuvenating potion and used the 
heart of an innocent child for it, so this is the strengthening his 
emaciated soul needs, the only thing that can satisfy him for a 
moment. His sick soul needs what could be called the first 
greening of a young heart, and to what else could I compare 
the early youth of an innocent feminine soul? If I said it is like 


Silhouettes 207 


a flower, I would say too little, for it is more than that; it is a 
flowering. The vitality of hope and faith and trust burgeons 
and blossoms in rich multiplicity; gentle yearnings stir in the 
delicate shoots, and dreams shade their flourishing. In this way 
it stirs a Faust; it beckons his restless soul like an island of peace 
in the calm ocean. That it is ephemeral, no one knows better 
than Faust; he does not believe in it any more than in anything 
else, but that it exists, of that he assures himself in the embrace 
of erotic love. Only the plenitude of innocence and childlike- 
ness can refresh him for a moment. 

In Goethe’s Faust, Mephistopheles has Faust see Margarete 
in a mirror. His eyes delight in gazing at her, but nevertheless 
itis not her beauty that he desires, although he takes that in ad- 
dition. What he desires is the pure, undisturbed, rich, imme- 
diate joy of a feminine soul, but he desires it sensually, not 
spiritually. In a certain sense, then, he does desire as does Don 
Juan, but still he desires in an entirely different way. At this 
point, some assistant professor or other, convinced of having 
been a Faust himself, since otherwise he certainly could not 
possibly have managed to become an assistant professor, 
would point out that Faust requires intellectual development 
and refinement in a girl who is to arouse his desire. Perhaps a 
larger number of assistant professors would consider this a 
brilliant observation, and their respective wives and sweet- 
hearts would nod approval. But it would miss the point com- 
pletely, for Faust would desire nothing less. A so-called re- 
fined girl would fall within the same relativity as he himself, 
although this would have no significance for him, would 
amount to nothing. With her smattering of refinement, she 
perhaps would tempt this old master of doubt to take her 
along out into the current, where she would quickly despair. 
An innocent young girl, however, is within another relativity 
and thus, in a certain sense, is nothing compared with Faust 
and yet, in another sense, is enormously much, since she is im- 
mediacy. Only in this immediacy is she a goal for his desire, 
and therefore I said that he desires immediacy not spiritually 
but sensually. 

Goethe understood all this perfectly well, and therefore 


183 


184 


208 Either/Or, I 


Margarete is a little middle-class girl, a girl one could almost 
be tempted to call insignificant. Since it is important with re- 
spect to Margarete’s grief, we shall now consider more closely 
how Faust presumably must have affected her. Of course, the 
particular features Goethe has emphasized are of great value, 
but I nevertheless believe that for the sake of completeness a 
little modification must be made. In her innocent simplicity, 
Margarete soon perceives that with respect to faith there is 
something wrong with Faust. In Goethe, this appears in a little 
catechization scene,*” which is unquestionably a superb inven- 
tion by the poet. The question now is what results this exam- 
ination may have for their relation to each other. It is apparent 
that Faust is a doubter, and it seems that Goethe, inasmuch as 
he does not suggest anything more in this respect, wanted to 
have Faust continue to be a doubter also in his relation to Mar- 
garete. He has tried to draw her attention away from all such 
probing and to fasten it simply and solely upon the reality of 
love [Kjerlighedens Realitet]. But I think, for one thing, that 
once the problem has come up this would be difficult for 
Faust, and, for another, I do not think it is psychologically cor- 
rect. I shall not dwell longer on this point, for Faust’s sake, but 
for Margarete’s sake I certainly shall, for if it is not apparent to 
her that he is a doubter, then her grief has an added element. 
So, then, Faust is a doubter, but he is no vain fool who wants 
to make himself important by doubting what others believe; 
his doubt has an objective foundation in him. To Faust’s 
credit, this has to be said. But as soon as he wants to press his 
doubt upon others, a spurious passion can very easily enter in. 
As soon as doubt is pressed upon others, there is an envy in- 
volved that rejoices in wresting from them what they regarded 
as certain. But in order for this passion of envy to be aroused 
in the doubter, there must be the possibility of opposition in 
the individual concerned. The temptation ceases either where 
there is none whatever or where it would even be unbecoming 
to suppose it. The latter is the case with a young girl. Face to 
face with her, a doubter is always in an awkward position. To 
wrest her faith from her is no task at all for him; on the con- 
trary, he feels that it is only through her faith that she is the 


Silhouettes 209 


great person she is. He feels humbled, for there is in her a nat- 
ural claim on him to be her supporter if she herself begins to 
waver. Of course, a clumsy fool of a doubter, a dabbler, pre- 
sumably could find satisfaction in wresting faith from a young 
girl and joy in scaring women and children since he cannot ter- 
rify men. But this is not the case with Faust; he is too great for 
that. 

Consequently, we can agree with Goethe that Faust betrays 
his doubt the first time, but I hardly believe it will happen with 
him a second time. This is very important with respect to the 
interpretation of Margarete. Faust readily perceives that Mar- 
garete’s entire significance hinges on her innocent simplicity. 
If this is taken from her, she is nothing in herself, nothing to 
him. This, then, must be preserved. He is a doubter, but as 
such he has all the elements of the positive within himself, for 
otherwise he would be a sorry doubter. He lacks the point of 
conclusion, and thereby all the elements become negative. 
She, however, has the point of conclusion, has childlikeness 
and innocence. Therefore, nothing is easier for him than to 
equip her. He has learned from experience that what he talked 
about as doubt often impressed others as positive truth. So 
now he finds his joy in enriching her with the opulent content 
of a way of looking at things; he takes out all the finery of im- 
mediate faith and finds joy in embellishing her with it, for it is 
very becoming to her, and she thereby becomes more beauti- 
ful in his eyes. In so doing, he has the added advantage that her 
soul attaches itself ever more tightly to his. She really does not 
understand him at all; like a child she attaches herself tightly to 
him; what for him is doubt is unswerving truth for her. But at 
the same time that he is building up [opbygge] her faith in this 
way, he is also undermining it, for he himself finally becomes 
the object of faith for her, a god and not a human being. 

But here I must try to prevent a misunderstanding. It might 
seem that I am making Faust into a base hypocrite. That is not 
at all the case. Margarete herself is the one who has brought up 
the whole matter; with half an eye he appraises the glory she 
believes is hers and sees that it cannot withstand his doubt, but 
he does not have the heart to destroy it and even behaves with 


{ 
185 


210 Either/Or, I 


a certain amiability toward her. Her love gives her significance 
for him, and yet she becomes practically a child; he conde- 
scends to her childlikeness and has his joy in seeing how she 
appropriates everything. This, however, has the most regret- 
able consequences for Margarete’s future. If it had become ap- 
parent to her that Faust was a doubter, she perhaps could have 
saved her faith later. In all humility, then, she would have rec- 
ognized that his high-flying, bold thoughts were not for her; 
she would have clung fast to what she had. But now she is in- 
debted to him for the content of faith, and yet when he has for- 
saken her she perceives that he himself has not believed in it. 
As long as he was with her, she did not discover the doubt; 
now when he is gone, everything is changed for her, and she 
sees doubt in everything, a doubt she cannot control since she 
always includes in her thinking the fact that Faust himself was 
unable to master it. 

That whereby Faust, also according to Goethe’s interpreta- 
tion, captivates Margarete is not Don Juan’s seductive talent 
but his prodigious superiority. Therefore, as she herself en- 
dearingly expresses it, she really cannot comprehend at all 
what Faust can see in her that is favorable.** Her first impres- 
sion of him, then, is completely overwhelming; in relation to 
him, she feels her nothingness. Hence, she does not belong to 
him the way Elvira belongs to Don Giovanni, for that is still 
the expression of independent existence in relation to him, but 
Margarete completely disappears in Faust; neither does she 
break with heaven in order to belong to him, for that would 
imply a justification in relation to him; imperceptibly, without 
the slightest reflection, he becomes everything to her. But just 
as from the beginning she is nothing, so she becomes, if I dare 
say so, less and less the more she is convinced of his almost di- 
vine superiority; she is nothing, and at the same time she exists 
only through him. What Goethe said somewhere about Ham- 
let,°*? that his soul in relation to his body was an acorn planted 
in a flower pot, with the result, therefore, that it bursts the 
container, is true of Margarete’s love. Faust is far too great for 
her, and her love must end by shattering her soul. And the mo- 
ment for this cannot be far distant, for Faust is well aware that 


Silhouettes 211 


she cannot remain in this immediacy; he does not take her into 
the higher regions of the spirit, for it is that, after all, from 
which he is fleeing; he desires her sensually—and forsakes her. 

So Faust has forsaken Margarete. Her loss is so terrible that, 
because of it, even those around her momentarily forget what 
they otherwise find difficult to forget—that she is dishonored. 
She collapses completely and is not even able to think about 
her loss; even the energy to comprehend her misfortune has 
been drained out of her. If this condition could continue, it 
would be impossible for reflective sorrow to commence. But 
little by little the consolation of those around her brings her to 
herself, nudges her thought into motion again; but as soon as 
it is in motion again, it is apparent that she is unable to hold fast 
to a single one of their observations. She listens to it as if it 
were not speaking to her, and nothing it says arrests or accel- 
erates the unrest in her thought process. The problem for her 
is the same as for Elvira—to think that Faust was a deceiver— 
but it is still more difficult, for she is far more deeply influ- 
enced by Faust. He was not merely a deceiver, but he was in 
fact a hypocrite; she has not sacrificed anything for him, but 
she owes him everything, and to a certain degree she still has 
this everything, except that now it proves to be a deception. 
But is what he said less true because he himself did not believe 
it? By no means, and yet for her it is, because she believed in it 
through him. 

It might seem that reflection would have a more difficult 
time starting in Margarete; that which frustrates it is the feel- 
ing that she was nothing at all. Nevertheless there is a prodi- 
gious dialectical elasticity here. If she could sustain the thought 
that in the strictest sense she was nothing, then reflection 
would be precluded, and then she would not have been de- 
ceived, either, for if one is nothing, there is no relationship, 
and where there is no relationship, there cannot be a decep- 
tion, either. To that extent she is at rest. This thought, how- 
ever, cannot be sustained but suddenly turns into its opposite. 
The thought that she was nothing expresses only that all the 
finite differences of love are negated, and therefore it is pre- 
cisely the expression for the absolute validity of her love, on 


186 


I 
187 


212 Either/Or, I 


which, in turn, her absolute justification is based. His conduct, 
therefore, is not only a deception but an absolute deception, 
because her love was absolute. And in this she will again be un- 
able to rest, because, since he has been everything to her, she 
will not even be able to sustain this thought except through 
him, but she cannot think it through him, because he was a de- 
ceiver. 

As those around her steadily become more and more alien 
to her, the inner motion begins. Not only has she loved Faust 
with her whole soul, but he was her life force; through him she 
came into existence [blev til]. As a result, her soul certainly 
does not become less agitated in mood than Elvira’s, but her 
particular moods are less agitated. She is on the way to having 
a basic mood, and the particular mood is like a bubble that rises 
from the depths and does not have the power to endure; nei- 
ther is it displaced by a new bubble but is dissolved in the gen- 
eral mood that she is nothing. This basic mood, moreover, is 
a condition that is felt and does not find expression in any spe- 
cific outburst; it is unutterable, and the attempt the particular 
mood makes to lift it, to raise it, is futile. Thus the total mood 
always resonates in the particular mood; as weakness and 
powerlessness, it constitutes the resonance for it. The partic- 
ular mood expresses itself, but it does not mitigate, does not 
relieve. It is, to borrow a saying from my Swedish Elvira that 
is definitely very expressive, even if a man does not com- 
pletely understand it, it is a false sigh, which deceives, and not 
a genuine sigh, which is a strengthening and beneficial mo- 
tion. The particular mood is not even full-toned or energetic; 
her expression is too burdened for that. 

“Can I forget him? Can the brook, however long it keeps on 
running, forget the spring, forget its source, sever itself from 
it? If so, it would just have to stop flowing! Can the arrow, 
however swiftly it flies, forget the bowstring? If so, its flight 
would just have to come to an end! Can the raindrop, however 
far it falls, forget the heaven from which it fell? If so, then it 
would just have to disintegrate! Can I become someone else, 
can I be born again of a mother who is not my mother? Can I 
forget him? Then I would just have to cease to be! 


Silhouettes 213 


“Can I bring him to mind? Can my recollection call him 
forth now that he has vanished, I who myself am only my rec- 
ollection of him? This pale, hazy image—is this the Faust I 
worshipped? I recollect his words, but I do not possess the res- 
onance in his voice! I remember his talks, but my breath is too 
faint to give them expression. Meaningless, they fall on deaf 
ears! 

“Faust, O Faust! Come back, satisfy the hungry, clothe the 
naked, revive the languishing, visit the lonely one!*° I certainly 
know that my love had no meaning for you, but, after all, nei- 
ther did I demand that. My love lay down humbly at your feet; 
my sigh was a prayer, my kiss a thank offering, my embrace 
adoring worship. Will you forsake me for this? Did you not 
know it beforehand? Or is it not, then, a reason to love me— 
that [need you, that my soul languishes when you are not with 
me? 

“God in heaven, forgive me for loving a human being more 
than I loved you, and yet I still do it; I know that it is a new sin 
that I speak this way to you. O Eternal Love, let your mercy 
hold me, do not thrust me away; give him back to me, incline 
his heart to me*! again; have mercy on me, God of mercy, that 
I pray this way again! 

“Can I curse him, then? What am I that I dare to be so bold? 
Can the clay pot be presumptuous toward the potter?4? What 
was I? Nothing! Clay in his hands, a rib from which he formed 
me!* What was I? A poor insignificant plant, and he stooped 
down to me; he lovingly raised me [opelskede];*4 he was my all, 
my god, the origin of my thoughts, the food of my soul. 

“Can I grieve? No, no! Sorrow broods like nocturnal fog 
over my soul. O come back, I will give you up, never claim to 
belong to you. Just sit with me; look at me so that I can gain 
enough strength to sigh; speak to me, tell about yourself as if 
you were a stranger, and I will forget that it is you; speak, so 
the tears may burst forth. Am I nothing at all, then, not even 
able to weep except through him! 

““Where shall I find peace and rest? Thoughts rise up in my 
soul; the one rises against the other; the one confuses the other. 
When you were with me, they obeyed your suggestions; then 


[ 
188 


189 


214 Either/Or, I 


I played with them as a child; I braided a wreath of them and 
put them on my head; I let them flow like my hair, ruffled in 
the wind. Now they twine themselves terrifyingly around me, 
twist themselves around me like snakes and crush my an- 
guished soul. 

“And Iam a mother! A living being demands nourishment 
from me. Can the hungry satisfy the hungry, the feeble from 
thirst refresh the thirsty? Shall I become a murderer, then? O 
Faust, come back; save the child in the womb even if you do 
not want to save the mother!”’ 

—Thus she is agitated, not by mood but in mood, but the 
particular mood is no mitigation for her, because it dissolves 
in the total mood she cannot banish. Indeed, if Faust had been 
taken away from her, Margarete would not seek any calming, 
her fate would indeed have been enviable in her eyes—but she 
is deceived. She lacks what could be called the situation of 
grief, for she is incapable of sorrowing alone. Indeed, if, like 
poor Florine in the fairy tale,*&gt; she could find entry into a cave 
of echoes, from which she knew that every sigh, every lament, 
would be heard by her lover, then she would not, like Florine, 
spend only three nights there, but she would stay there day 
and night; but in Faust’s palace there is no cave of echoes, and 
he has no ear in her heart. 


Perhaps, dear Zuunagavexempevon, I have already held your 
attention too long on these pictures, all the more so because, 
however much I have said, nothing visible has appeared to 
you. But this, of course, is due not to fraudulence in my pre- 
sentation but to the subject itself and to the subtlety of sorrow. 
When the favorable opportunity is offered, then what is hid- 
den discloses itself. This we have in our power. And now in 
parting we shall unite these three women betrothed to sorrow; 
we shall have them embrace one another in the harmony of 
sorrow; we shall have them form a group before us, a taber- 
nacle, where the voice of sorrow is never silent, where sighs 
do not cease, because more carefully and faithfully than vestal 
virgins they keep watch over the observance of the sacred cer- 
emonies. Should we interrupt them in this; should we wish for 


Silhouettes 215 


them the return of what was lost; would that be an advantage 
for them? Have they not already received a higher initiation? 
And this initiation will unite them and envelop their union in 
beauty and provide mitigation in union, for only the person 
who has been bitten by snakes knows what one who has been 
bitten by snakes must suffer.” 


1 


THE UNHAPPIEST ONE 


AN INSPIRED ADDRESS TO THE 
ZYMITAPANEKPQMENOI 


Peroration at the Meeting on Fridays 


As is well known, there is said to be a grave somewhere in 
England that is distinguished not by a magnificent monument 
or a mournful setting but by a short inscription—‘‘The Un- 
happiest One.””! It is said that the grave was opened, but no 
trace of a corpse was found. Which is the more amazing—that 
no corpse was found or that the grave was opened? It is indeed 
strange that someone took the time to see whether anyone was 
in it. When one reads a name in an epitaph, one is easily 
tempted to wonder how he passed his life on earth; one might 
wish to climb down into the grave for a conversation with 
him. But this inscription—it is so freighted with meaning! A 
book can have a title that prompts a desire to read the book, 
but a title in itself can be so thought-laden, so personally ap- 
pealing, that one will never read the book.? This inscription is 
in truth very freighted with meaning—shocking or gratifying 
according to one’s mood—for anyone who perhaps secretly in 
his heart pledged his troth to the thought that he was the most 
unhappy one. But I can imagine a person whose soul has never 
been preoccupied in that way and for whose curiosity there 
was the task of finding out whether anyone was in that grave. 
And look, the grave was empty! Has he perhaps risen from the 
dead; does he perhaps want to mock the poet’s words: 


—In the grave there is peace, 
Its silent occupant does not know sorrow.? 


Did he find no rest, not even in the grave; is he perhaps still 
fitfully wandering over the earth; has he left his house, his 
home, leaving behind only his address! Or has he still not been 
found—he, the unhappiest one, whom not even the Furies are 
pursuing until he finds the door of the temple* and the humble 
petitioner’s bench, but whom sorrows keep alive and sorrows 
follow to the grave! 

Ifhe has not been found, then let us like crusaders, dear Zup- 


193 


194 


195 


220 Either/Or, I 


agavexedwpevot, commence a pilgrimage—n pt to that sacred 
sepulchre in the happy East, but to that mournful grave in the 
unhappy West. At that empty grave, we shall seek him, the 
unhappiest one, certain of finding him, for just as the longing 
of the believers yearns for the sacred sepulchre, so the unhappy 
ones are drawn toward the West to that empty grave, and each 
one is absorbed in the thought that it is destined for him. 

Or may it be that such deliberation is not a worthy subject 
for consideration by us, whose activity, in compliance with 
our society’s sacred custom, is a venture in aphoristic, occa- 
sional devotion—we who do not think and talk aphoristically 
but live aphoristically; we who live &amp;pogtopévor and segregati,5 
as aphorisms in life, without association with men, having no 
share in their griefs and their joys; we who are not consonants 
in the clamor of life but are solitary birds in the stillness of 
night, assembled together on only one occasion to be edified 
by representations of the wretchedness of life, of the length of 
the day, and of the endless duration of time; we, dear Xuuna- 
eavexeapevotr, who do not believe in the game of gladness or the 
happiness of fools; we who believe in nothing but unhappi- 
ness. 

See how they press forward in countless numbers, all the 
unhappy ones. Yet many are they who think themselves 
called; few are the chosen.® A separation must be made be- 
tween them—one word, and the crowd vanishes; specifically 
excluded are the uninvited guests, all those who think that 
death is the greatest calamity, who became unhappy because 
they feared death; for we, dear Zuunagavexe@pevor, we, like 
the Roman soldiers, do not fear death;? we know a worse 
calamity, and first and last, above all—it is to live. Indeed, if 
there were a human being who could not die, if what the leg- 
end tells of the Wandering Jew is true, why should we have 
scruples about pronouncing him the unhappiest one? Then 
why the grave was empty could be explained—namely, to in- 
dicate that the unhappiest one was the person who could not 
die, who could not slip down into a grave. That would settle 
the matter, the answer would be easy, for the unhappiest one 
of all would be the person who could not die, the happy one 


The Unhappiest One 221 


the person who could. Happy is the one who died in old age; 
happier is the one who died in youth; happiest is the one who 
died at birth; happiest of all the one who was never born. But 
this is not the way it is; death is the common fate of all human 
beings, and inasmuch as the unhappiést one has not been 
found, he must be sought within these confines. 

See, the crowd vanished; the number is reduced. I do not 
say: Give me your attention, for I know that I have it; I do not 
say: Lend me your ears, for I know that they belong to me. 
Your eyes are sparkling; you lean forward in your seats. It is a 
contest well worth your participation, a struggle even more 
terrible than if it were a matter of life and death, for we do not 
fear death. But the reward—yes, it is more magnificent than 
any other in the world, and more certain, for the person who 
is sure that he is the unhappiest one does not need to fear for- 
tune; he will not taste the humiliation of having to shout in his 
final hour: Solon, Solon, Solon!® 

So, then, we are inaugurating an open competition, from 
which no one will be excluded, neither because of rank nor be- 
cause of age. No one will be excluded except the happy ones 
and the person who fears death—every worthy member of the 
community of the unhappy is welcome; a seat of honor is des- 
ignated for every really unhappy person, the grave for the un- 
happiest one. My voice rings out in the world; listen to it, all 
you who call yourselves unhappy in the world but who do not 
fear death. My voice rings back into the past, for we do not 
want to be so sophistical as to exclude the dead and departed 
because they are dead, for they have in fact lived. Forgive me, 
I beseech you, for disturbing your repose momentarily; let us 
meet here by this empty grave. Three times I shout it loudly 
to the world: Hear this, you unhappy ones, for it is not our in- 
tention to decide this matter among ourselves here in a nook 
of the world. The place has been found where it must be de- 
cided before the whole world! 

But before we commence interrogating them one by one, 
let us make ourselves qualified to sit here as worthy judges and 
fellow contestants. Let us strengthen our minds, arm them 
against the inveiglement of the ear, for what voice is so ingra- 


196 


222 Either/Or, I 


tiating as that of the unhappy one, what voice so bewitching 
as that of the unhappy one when he is speaking about his own 
unhappiness. Let us make ourselves worthy to sit as judges 
and fellow contestants so that we do not lose the overall view, 
are not confused by the particulars, for the eloquence of grief 
is infinite and infinitely inventive. We shall divide the unhappy 
into specific groups, and only one from each will be heard. We 
shall not deny that no particular individual is the unhappiest 
one; it is rather a class, but we shall not therefore have scruples 
about awarding the representative of this class the title of the 
unhappiest one, shall not have scruples about awarding him 
the grave. 

In all of Hegel’s systematic works there is one section that 
discusses the unhappy consciousness.? One always comes to 
the reading of such investigations with an inner uneasiness and 
palpitation of the heart, with a fear that one will learn too 
much or too little. “The unhappy consciousness” is a phrase 
that can almost make the blood run cold, the nerves shiver, if 
itis merely introduced casually into the course of a discussion, 
and then, uttered deliberately, it can, like that cryptic sentence 
in a story by Clemens Brentano: tertia nux mors est [the third 
nut is death], © make a person tremble like a sinner. Ah, happy 
is the one who has nothing more to do with the subject than to 
write a paragraph about it; even happier the one who can write 
the next. The unhappy one is the person who in one way or 
another has his ideal, the substance of his life, the plenitude of 
his consciousness, his essential nature, outside himself. The 
unhappy one is the person who is always absent from himself, 
never present to himself. But in being absent, one obviously 
can be in either past or future time. The whole territory of the 
unhappy consciousness is thereby adequately circumscribed. 
For this firm limitation, we thank Hegel, and now, since we 
are not only philosophers who view this kingdom at a dis- 
tance, we shall as natives consider more closely the various 
stages contained therein. 

So, then, the unhappy one is absent. But one is absent when 
one is in either past or future time. This expression must be in- 
sisted upon, for it is obvious, as philology also teaches us, that 


The Unhappiest One 223 


there is a tempus [tense] that is present in a past time and a tem- 
pus that is present in a future time, but this same science also 
teaches us that there is a tempus that is plus quam perfectum [more 
than perfect: pluperfect, past perfect], in which there is no 
present, and a futurum exactum [future perfect] with the same 
feature. There are the hoping and the recollecting!! individu- 
alities. If, generally, only the person who is present to himself 
is happy, then these people, insofar as they are only hoping or 
only recollecting, are in a sense certainly unhappy individual- 
ities. But, strictly speaking, one cannot call an individuality 
unhappy who is present in hope or in recollection. The point 
to stress here is that he is present in it. We also see from this 
that one blow, be it ever so hard, cannot possibly make a per- 
son into the unhappiest one. That is, one blow can only either 
rob him of hope and thereby make him present in recollection 
or rob him of recollection and thereby make him present in 
hope. We shall now proceed and see how the unhappy individ- 
uality may be defined more precisely. 

First we shall consider the hoping individuality. When, as 
one who hopes (and consequently to that extent is unhappy), 
he is not present to himself, he becomes unhappy in the stricter 
sense of the word. A person who hopes for eternal life is cer- 
tainly in a sense an unhappy individuality, insofar as he re- 
nounces the present; but strictly speaking he is nevertheless 
not unhappy, because he is present to himself in this hope and 
does not come into conflict with the particular elements of fi- 
niteness. If, however, he cannot become present to himself in 
hope but loses his hope, then hopes again, etc., then he is ab- 
sent from himself, not merely in present but also in future 
time, and thus we have a form of unhappiness. If we consider 
the recollecting individuality, we find the same thing. Ifhe can 
become present to himself in past time, then, strictly speaking, 
he is not unhappy; but if he cannot do this but is continually 
absent from himself in past time, then we have a form of un- 
happiness. 

Recollection is above all the distinctive element of the un- 
happy ones, which is natural, because past time has the notable 
characteristic that it is past; future time, that it is to come. Ina 


197 


198 


224 Either/Or, I 


sense, therefore, one can say that future time is closer to the 
present than is the past. In order for the hoping individuality 
to become present in future time, it must have reality [Reali- 
tet|'? or, more correctly, it must acquire reality for him; in or- 
der for the recollecting individuality to become present in past 
time, it must have had reality for him. But when the hoping 
individuality wants to hope for a future time that nevertheless 
can acquire no reality for him, or the recollecting individuality 
wants to recollect a time that has had no reality, then we have 
essentially unhappy individualities. The former might not be 
thought possible or might be regarded as sheer madness; but 
that is not so, because the hoping individuality certainly does 
not hope for something that does not have reality for him, but 
he hopes for something that he himself knows cannot be real- 
ized. That is, if a person, in losing hope, continues to hope in- 
stead of becoming a recollecting individuality, then we have 
this form. Ifan individuality in losing recollection or in having 
nothing to recollect will not become a hoping individuality 
but continues to be one who recollects, then we have a form of 
unhappiness. If, for example, an individual became absorbed 
in antiquity or in the Middle Ages or in any other time, but in 
such a way that it had a decisive reality for him, or he became 
absorbed in his own childhood or youth in the way that this 
had had decisive reality for him, then, strictly speaking, he 
would not be an unhappy individuality. But if! were to imag- 
ine a person who had had no childhood himself, since this age 
had passed him by without real meaning, but who now, for 
example, by becoming a teacher of children, discovered all the 
beauty in childhood and now wanted to recollect his own 
childhood, always stared back at it, he would certainly be a 
very appropriate example. He would discover backwards the 
meaning of that which was past for him and which he never- 
theless wanted to recollect in all its meaning. If] were to imag- 
ine a person who had lived without grasping the joy of life or 
the enjoyment of it and who now at the point of death had his 
eyes opened to it, if I were to imagine that he did not die, 
which would be the best that could happen, but revived with- 
out therefore living his life over again, this person surely could 


Tie Unhappiest One 225 


be considered when the question arises about who is the un- 
happiest one. 

Hope’s unhappy individualities never have the pain of rec- 
ollection’s. The hoping individualities always have a more 
pleasant disappointment. Therefore, the unhappiest one will 
always have to be sought among recollection’s unhappy indi- 
vidualities. 

But we shall go on. We shall imagine a combination of the 
two forms described, unhappy forms in the stricter sense. The 
unhappy hoping individuality could not become present to 
himself in his hope; likewise the unhappy recollecting individ- 
uality. The only combination possible is one in which it is rec- 
ollection that prevents him from becoming present in his hope 
and it is hope that prevents him from becoming present in his 
recollection. This is due, on the one hand, to his continually 
hoping for that which should be recollected; his hope is con- 
tinually being disappointed, but he discovers that this disap- 
pointment occurs not because his objective is pushed further 
ahead but because he is past his goal, because it has already 
been experienced or should have been experienced and thus 
has passed over into recollection. On the other hand, he is con- 
tinually recollecting that for which he should hope, because he 
has already encompassed the future in thought, has already ex- 
perienced it in thought, and he recollects what he has experi- 
enced instead of hoping for it. Thus, what he is hoping for lies 
behind him; what he recollects lies ahead of him. His life is not 
backwards but is turned the wrong way in two directions. He 
will soon perceive his trouble even though he does not com- 
prehend the reason for it. 

In order, however, that he will really have the opportunity 
to feel it, misunderstanding intervenes and in an odd way rid- 
icules him at every moment. Ordinarily, he enjoys the honor 
of being regarded as being in his right mind, and yet he knows 
that if he were to explain to a single person how it really is with 
him, he would be declared insane. This is enough to drive one 
mad, and yet this does not happen, and this is precisely his 
trouble. His calamity is that he came into the world too early 
and therefore continually comes too late. He is continually 


199 





very close to the goal, and at the same moment he is far from 
it; he then discovers that what is making him unhappy now, 
because he has it or because he is this way, is precisely what 
would have made him happy a few years ago if he had had it, 
whereas he became unhappy because he did not have it. His 
life is as meaningless as Ancaeus’s, of whom it is customary to 
say that nothing is known except that he gave rise to the prov- 
erb 


TOAAG petaés médrer nbArKos xal yetAEeos &amp;xoov 
[There is many a slip betwixt the cup and the lip], 


as if this were not more than enough. His life knows no repose 
and has no content. He is not present to himself in the mo- 
ment, nor is he present to himself in the future, for the future 
has been experienced, nor in past time, for the past has not yet 
come. Thus, like Latona,'* he is chased around in the darkness 
of the Hyperboreans,'5 to the bright islands of the equator, is 
unable to give birth, and is always like a woman in labor. 
Abandoned to himself, he stands alone in the wide world; he 
has no contemporaries to whom he can attach himself, no past 
he can long for, because his past has not yet come, no future he 
can hope for, because his future is already past. All alone, he 
faces the whole world as the “‘you”’ with whom he is in con- 
flict, for all the rest of the world is for him only one person, 
and this person, this inseparable bothersome friend, is misun- 
derstanding. He cannot grow old, for he has never been 
young; he cannot become young, for he has already grown 
old; in a sense he cannot die, for indeed he has not lived; in a 
sense he cannot live, for indeed he is already dead. He cannot 
love, for love is always present tense, and he has no present 
time, no future, no past, and yet he has a sympathetic nature, 
and he hates the world only because he loves it; he has no pas- 
sion, not because he lacks it, but because at the same moment 
he has the opposite passion; he does not have time for any- 
thing, not because his time is filled with something else, but 
because he has no time at all; he is powerless, not because he 
lacks energy, but because his own energy makes him power- 
less. 


The Unhappiest One 227 


But very soon our hearts are sufficiently hardened, our ears 
stopped up, though not closed. We have heard the level- 
headed voice of deliberation; let us be attentive to the elo- 
quence of passion—brief, pithy, as all passion is. ! 

There stands a young girl. She complains that her lover has 
been unfaithful to her. This does not lend itself to reflection. 
But in the whole world she loved only him; she loved him 
with all her soul, all her heart, all her mind!7—then let her rec- 
ollect and grieve. 

Is this an actual person or is it an image; is it a living person 
who is dying or a dead person who is living—it is Niobe. '8 She 
lost everything all at once; she lost that to which she gave life; 
she lost that which gave life to her! Look up at her, dear Zup- 
nagavexompevot; she is standing only a little higher than the 
world, like a monument on a burial mound. But no hope 
beckons her, no future motivates her, no prospect tempts her, 
no hope perturbs her—hopeless she stands, turned to stone in 
recollection. She was unhappy for a moment; in the same mo- 
ment she became happy, and nothing can take her happiness 
from her; the world changes, but she knows no change, and 
time comes, but for her there is no future time. 

Look over there, what a beautiful union! The one generation 
offers a hand to the other! Is it an invitation to blessing, to 
faithful solidarity, to a happy dance? It is the outcast [forstodte] 
family of Oedipus,'? and the blow [sted] is transmitted and it 
crushes the last one—it is Antigone. But she is provided for; 
the grief of a family is enough for a human life. She has turned 
her back on hope; she has exchanged its fickleness for the faith- 
fulness of recollection. Stay happy, then, dear Antigone! We 
wish you a long life, as meaningful as a deep sigh. May no for- 
getfulness rob you of anything! May the daily bitterness of 
sorrow be offered to you abundantly! 

A powerful figure appears, but he is not alone. He has 
friends—how, then, does he come to be here? It is the patriarch 
of sorrow; it is Job*°—and his friends. He lost everything, but 
not in one blow, for the Lord took away, and the Lord took 
away, and the Lord took away. The friends taught him to per- 
ceive the bitterness of loss; for the Lord gave, and the Lord 


201 


202 


228 Either/Or, I 


gave, and the Lord gave, and a foolish wife! into the bargain. 
He lost everything, for what he kept is of no interest to us. 
Honor is due him, dear Zupnagavexedpevor, for his gray hair 
and his unhappiness. He lost everything, but he had possessed 
it. 

His hair is gray, his head is bowed down, his visage with- 
ered, his soul troubled. It is the prodigal son’s father. Like Job, 
he lost what to him was dearest in the world, but it was the 
enemy who took it, not the Lord; he did not lose it, but he is 
losing it; it is not being taken away from him, but it is vanish- 
ing. He is not sitting at home by the hearth in sackcloth and 
ashes; he has gone from his home, has left everything to seek 
the lost; he grasps for him, but his arm does not reach him; he 
calls to him, but his voice does not catch up with him. Yet he 
hopes, even if through tears; he glimpses him, even if through 
mists; he catches up with him, even if in death. His hope ages 
him, and nothing binds him to the world except the hope for 
which he lives. His feet are tired, his eyes dim, his body craves 
rest, his hope lives. His hair is white, his body decrepit, his feet 
pause, his heart breaks, his hope lives. Lift him up, dear Zup- 
magavexompevor; he was unhappy. 

Who is that pallid figure, feeble as a ghost of one dead! His 
name is forgotten; many centuries have gone by since his day. 
He was a young man; he was ardent.?? He sought martyrdom. 
In his mind, he saw himself nailed to the cross and saw heaven 
open, but actuality was too heavy for him; his ardor vanished; 
he denied his Lord and himself. He wanted to carry a world, 
but he overstrained himself on it; his soul was not crushed or 
destroyed; it was broken, his spirit paralyzed, his soul crip- 
pled. Congratulate him, dear Zuunagavexedmpevor, he was un- 
happy. And yet he did indeed become happy; he did indeed be- 
come what he wished to be. He became a martyr, even though 
his martyrdom was not what he wanted, being nailed to the 
cross or cast to the wild animals, but was being burned alive, 
slowly being consumed by a low fire. 

A young girl sits yonder, so very pensive. Her lover was un- 
faithful to her—this does not lend itself to reflection. Young 
girl, look at the serious faces of this assemblage; it has heard 


The Unhappiest One 229 


more terrible calamities; its audacious soul demands some- 
thing even greater. Yes, but in the whole world I loved only 
him; I loved him with all my soul, all my heart, all my mind.” 
—We have already heard all that once before; do not weary our 
impatient longing. After all, you can recollect and grieve. 
—No, I cannot grieve, for he perhaps was not unfaithful to 
me; he may not have been a deceiver. —Why can you not 
grieve? Come closer, chosen one among maidens; forgive this 
rigorous interrogator for wanting to thrust you back for a mo- 
ment. You cannot grieve, but then you can hope. —No, I can- 
not hope, for he was an enigma. —All right, my girl, I do un- 
derstand you; you stand high on the ladder of unhappiness. 
Look at her, dear Zupnagavexedpevor; she is poised almost at 
the summit of unhappiness. But you must divide yourself; you 
must hope during the day, grieve during the night, or grieve 
during the day and hope during the night. Be proud, for one is 
to be proud not of happiness but of unhappiness. Certainly 
you are not the unhappiest one, but do you not think, dear 
Luunagavexodpevot, that we can award her an honorable acces- 
sit [second place]? We cannot award her the grave, but the 
place closest to it. 

For there he stands, the envoy from the kingdom of sighs, 
the chosen favorite of suffering, the apostle of grief, the silent 
friend of pain, the unhappy lover of recollection, confused in 
his recollection by the light of hope, frustrated in his hope by 
the ghosts of recollection. His brow is troubled, his knees are 
slack, and yet he leans on himself alone. He is exhausted, and 
yet how full of energy; his eyes do not seem to have shed, but 
to have drunk, many tears, and yet they flame with a fire that 
could consume the whole world, but not a splinter of sorrow 
in his own breast; he is bowed down, and yet his youth por- 
tends a long life; his lips smile at the world, which does not un- 
derstand him. Arise, dear Zupnagavexedpevor; bow down, 
you witnesses of sorrow, in this solemn hour. I hail you, great 
unknown, whose name I do not know; I hail you with your 
title of honor: the unhappiest one. Greetings and salutations 
from the community of the unhappy to you here in your 
home; greetings and salutations to you at the entrance to this 


I 
203 


230 Either/Or, I 


humble, low dwelling, which nevertheless is prouder than all 
the palaces of the world. See, the stone is rolled away; the 
shade of the grave awaits you with its delicious coolness. But 
perhaps the time has not yet come, perhaps the way is long, 
but we promise you that we will assemble here often to envy 
you your fortune. So accept our wish, a good wish: May no 
one understand you but all envy you; may no friend attach 
himself to you; may no girl fall in love with you; may no secret 
sympathy suspect your solitary pain; may no eye fathom your 
remote sorrow; may no ear ferret out your secret sigh! Or if 
your proud soul disdains such compassionate wishes, scorns 
this mitigation—then may the girls fall in love with you; may 
those who are pregnant turn to you in their anxiety; may the 
mothers trust you; may the dying seek consolation in you; 
may the young people attach themselves to you; may the men 
rely upon you; may the aged reach for you as for a cane—may 
the whole world believe that you are able to make it happy. 
Farewell, then, you the unhappiest one! **But what am I say- 
ing—‘‘the unhappiest’’? I ought to say “‘the happiest,” for this 
is indeed precisely a gift of fortune that no one can give him- 
self. See, language breaks down, and thought is confused, for 
who indeed is the happiest but the unhappiest and who the un- 
happiest but the happiest, and what is life but madness, and 
faith but foolishness, and hope but a staving off of the evil day, 
and love but vinegar in the wound. 

He disappeared, and we stand again by the empty grave. So 
we wish him peace and rest and healing, and all possible good 
fortune, and a quick death, and an eternal oblivion, and no re- 
membrance, lest the memory of him make another unhappy. 

Arise, dear Zupxagavexompevot, The night is over; the day is 
beginning its unflagging activity again, never, so it seems, 
tired of repeating itself forever and ever.” 


THE FIRST LOVE 


A COMEDY IN ONE ACT BY SCRIBE 


Translated by J. L. Heiberg! 


I This article was planned for publication in a journal Fred- 
2° erik Unsmann had planned to issue at specific times. Ah, what 
are all human plans! 


Anyone who has ever had leanings toward productivity has 
certainly also noticed that it is a little accidental external cir- 
cumstance that becomes the occasion for the actual producing. 
Only the authors who in one way or another have made a final 
purpose into their inspiration will perhaps deny this. This, 
however, is to their own injury, for they are thereby deprived 
of the extreme poles of all true and all sound productivity. The 
one is what is traditionally called “invocation of the muse’”’; 
the other is the occasion. —The expression “invocation of the 
muse”’ can occasion a misunderstanding. To invoke the muse 
may signify, for one thing, that I invoke the muse; for another, 
that the muse invokes me. Any author who is either so naive 
as to believe that everything depends on an honest will, on in- 
dustry and effort, or so shameless as to offer for sale the prod- 
ucts of the spirit will not be wanting in ardent invocation or 
brash forwardness. But not much is achieved thereby, for 
what Wessel once said still holds concerning the god of taste 
“whom all invoke,” that he “‘so rarely comes.”? But if we in- 
terpret this expression to mean that it is the muse who in- 
vokes—I shall not say us, but those concerned—then the mat- 
ter acquires a different meaning. Whereas the authors who 
invoke the muse also embark without her coming, those last 
described, on the other hand, are in another dilemma, in that 
they need an extra element for an inner decision to become an 
outer decision; this element is what one must call the occasion. 

In other words, by invoking them, the muse has beckoned 
them away from the world, and now they listen only to her 
voice, and the wealth of thought is opened to them, but so 
overwhelmingly that, although every word is clear and vivid, 
it seems to them as if it were not their possession. When con- 
sciousness has come to itself again to the extent that it pos- 
sesses the whole content, then the moment is reached that con- 
tains the possibility of actual coming into existence, and yet 


207 


208 


209 


234 Either/Or, I 


something is lacking, namely, the occasion—which is just as 
necessary, if you please, although in another sense most insig- 
nificant. It has pleased the gods to link together the greatest 
contradictions in this way.‘ This is a secret implicit in actual- 
ity—an offense to the Jews and foolishness to the Greeks.&gt; The 
occasion is always the accidental, and the prodigious paradox 
is that the accidental is absolutely just as necessary as the nec- 
essary. In the ideal sense, the occasion is not the accidental as, 
for example, when I think the accidental in the logical sense, 
but the occasion is the accidental in the sense of fetishism, and 
yet in this accidentality it is the necessary. 

But there is much confusion with respect to what in use and 
wont is called the occasion. Both too much and too little are 
seen in it. Any literary productivity in the category of trivial- 
ity—and, worse luck, this kind of productivity is most of all 
the order of the day—overlooks the occasion just as much as it 
overlooks inspiration. For this reason, such literary productiv- 
ity believes that it is appropriate to any age—something that 
can be conceded to it. Therefore, it completely overlooks the 
significance of the occasion—that is, it sees an occasion in 
everything. It is like a talkative person who in the most op- 
posite things sees an occasion to bring in himself and his story, 
whether one has heard it before or not. But thereby the punc- 
tum saliens [salient point] is lost. On the other side is the literary 
productivity that falls in love with the occasion. The first kind 
can be said to see an occasion in everything, the second to see 
everything in the occasion. This describes the great company 
of occasional authors, from the occasional poets in the deeper 
sense to those who in the stricter sense see everything in the 
occasion and therefore use the same verse, the same formulas, 
and yet hope that for those concerned the occasion will be a 
sufficient occasion for an appropriate honorarium. 

In our day, the occasion, which as such is the unessential and 
accidental, may sometimes venture into the revolutionary. 
The occasion often plays the absolute master; it determines the 
outcome; it makes the product and the producer into some- 
thing or nothing, whatever it wishes. The poct expects the oc- 
casion to inspire, and with amazement he sees that nothing 


The First Love 235 


happens, or he produces something that he himself secretly re- 
gards as insignificant and then sees the occasion make every- 
thing of it, sees himself honored and singled out in every pos- 
sible way, and privately knows that he has the occasion alone 
to thank for it. So these writers fall in love with the occasion; 
the ones we described previously overlook it and therefore in 
every sense are always uncalled. They can actually be divided 
into two classes: those who still suggest that an occasion is nec- 
essary and those who do not even pay attention to it. Both 
classes are based, of course, on an exorbitant overrating of 
their own worth. When someone continually bandies about 
such locutions as ‘‘On this occasion it occurs to me,” “The oc- 
casion prompts me to think,” etc., one can always be sure that 
such a person is on the wrong track as far as he himself is con- 
cerned. He often sees in even the most trifling matter an occa- 
sion to put in his bit of comment. Those who do not even sug- 
gest the necessity of an occasion may be regarded as less 
conceited but more demented. Without looking to the right or 
the left, they spin out indefatigably the thin thread of their 
babbling, and they produce the same effect on life with their 
chatter and their writing as the mill in a fairy tale, of which it 
says: And while all this was happening, the mill went klip 
klap, klip klap.® 

And yet even the most consummate, the most profound, 
and the most meaningful work has an occasion. The occasion 
is the tenuous, almost invisible web in which the fruit is sus- 
pended. Therefore, insofar as it sometimes seems that some- 
thing essential is the occasion, this is usually a mistake, since in 
such a case it is likely to be only a particular edge of it. If some- 
one will not concede that I am correct in this, it is due to a con- 
fusion of occasion with ground and cause.’ If, for example, 
someone would ask me, ‘‘What is the occasion for all these 
comments?” and he would be satisfied if] answered, “The fol- 
lowing,” he would make himself and allow me to make my- 
self guilty of such a confusion. But if he used the word “‘occa- 
sion” in his question very scrupulously, it would be very 
proper for me to reply, “It has no occasion.”’ With respect to 
the particular parts of the whole, it would be absurd to de 


210 


236 Either/Or, I 


mand that which one may properly demand with respect to 
the whole. That is, if these comments were to claim to be an 
occasion, they in themselves would have to be a small 
rounded-off whole, which would be an egotistic attempt on 
their part. 

The occasion, therefore, is of the greatest significance for 
every literary work—yes, that is what really determines its 
true esthetic value. Literary works without any occasion al- 
ways lack something—not outside themselves, for although 
the occasion belongs to it, yet in another sense it does not—but 
they lack something within themselves. A literary work in 
which the occasion is everything also lacks something. That is, 
the occasion is generative in the negative sense, not the posi- 
tive. A creation is a production out of nothing, but the occa- 
sion is the nothing that lets everything come forth. The whole 
wealth of thought, the fullness of the idea, can be present, and 
still the occasion is lacking. Nothing new, then, comes 
through the occasion, but through the occasion everything 
comes forth. The modest meaning of occasion is, in fact, ex- 
pressed in the word itself.® 

This is something that so many people are unable to grasp, 
but that is due to their having no intimation of what an esthetic 
work really is. A lawyer can write his plea, a merchant his let- 
ter, etc., without suspecting the secret that lies in the word 
“occasion,” despite the fact that he begins with “On the oc- 
casion of your esteemed.” 

Now, some may agree with what I have developed here and 
concede its significance for poetic works but would be very 
surprised if I were to bring something similar to bear on re- 
viewers and critics. And yet I believe that it is most important 
precisely here and that the disregard of the significance of oc- 
casion has had the result that reviews have generally been so 
bungled, have been such downright hackwork. In the world 
of criticism, the occasion acquires heightened significance. Al- 
though this accounts for our all too frequently finding the oc- 
casion mentioned in critical reviews, it is as plain as day that 
little is known about how it all hangs together. The critic does 
not seem to need an invocation of the muse, for, after all, he is 


The First Love 237 


not producing a literary work; but if he does not need an in- 
vocation of the muse, then he does not need the occasion, 
either. We should not forget, however, the importance of the 
old saying: Like is understood only by like.? 

Surely the object of the esthetician’s consideration is already 
complete, and he is not, like the poet himself, supposed to pro- 
duce. Nevertheless, the occasion has absolutely the same sig- 
nificance. The esthetician who regards esthetics as his profes- 
sion and in turn sees in his profession the legitimate occasion is 
eo ipso lost. This in no way means that he cannot perform var- 
ious kinds of competent work, but he has not comprehended 
the secret of all production. He is too much a Pelagian’® auto- 
crat to be able to rejoice in childlike amazement over the curi- 
ous fact that strange forces seem to produce what a person 
believes belongs to himself: namely, inspiration and the occa- 
sion. 

Inspiration and the occasion belong inseparably together; it 
is a combination frequently seen in the world: the great one, 
the exalted, always has in his company an agile little person. 
Such a person is the occasion, a person to whom one generally 
would not tip one’s hat, who does not dare to open his mouth 
when he is in high society but sits silent with a mischievous 
smile and inwardly regales himself without divulging what he 
is smiling about or that he knows how important, how indis- 
pensable, he is; still less would he become involved in an ar- 
gument about it, for he knows very well that it does not help 
and that every occasion is used only to humiliate him. The oc- 
casion always has this equivocal character, and it is of no more 
use to want to deny this, to want to free oneself from this 
thorn in the flesh,'! than to want to place the occasion on the 
throne, for it looks very foolish in purple and with scepter in 
hand, and it is immediately obvious that it was not born to 
rule. It is very easy, however, to go astray in this manner, and 
frequently it is the best minds that do so. In other words, when 
a person has enough of an eye for life to see how the eternal 
being flouts mankind by having something so insignificant 
and inferior, something people are almost ashamed to talk 
about in polite society, be absolutely part of it all, he is readily 


211 


212 


238 Either/Or, I 


tempted to want to meddle with the affair, indeed, to want to 
return the taunt. Just as God mocks the greatness of men by 
forging them into the law of the occasion, so a person in turn 
mocks by making the occasion into everything and the next 
moment into foolishness, whereby God then becomes super- 
fluous, the concept of a wise Governance becomes a piece of 
folly, and the occasion becomes a wag who pokes fun at God 
just as much as at man, so that all existence ends in a jest, a 
joke, a charade. 

So the occasion is simultaneously the most significant and 
the most insignificant, the highest and the lowest, the most 
important and the most unimportant. Without the occasion, 
nothing at all actually occurs, and yet the occasion has no part 
at all in what occurs. The occasion is the final category, the es- 
sential category of transition from the sphere of the idea to ac- 
tuality. Logic should bear this in mind. It can immerse itself as 
much as it wishes in immanental thinking, plunge from noth- 
ing down into the most concrete form;!? it never reaches the 
occasion and therefore never reaches actuality, either. In the 
idea, all actuality can be in readiness—without the occasion, it 
never becomes actual. The occasion is a finite category, and it 
is impossible for immanental thinking to grasp it; it is too 
much a paradox for that. We see this because that which comes 
out of the occasion is something quite different from the oc- 
casion itself, which is an absurdity to any immanental think- 
ing. But for that reason the occasion is also the most amusing, 
the most interesting, the wittiest of all categories. Like a wren, 
it is everywhere and nowhere. Like the elves, it walks around 
in life invisible to all the schoolmasters,!? whose gestures 
therefore become an inexhaustible material for laughter to the 
person who believes in the occasion. The occasion, then, is 
nothing in and by itself and is something only in relation to 
that which it occasions, and in relation to that it is actually 
nothing. That is, if the occasion were something else than 
nothing, it would immediately have a relative, immanental 
connection with what it produces and would then be either 
ground! or cause. If this is not held fast, everything is con- 
fused again. 


The First Love 239 


Thus, if I were to say that the occasion for the present little 
review of a play by Scribe was the superb performance it re- 
ceived, | would insult the dramatic art, for it is certainly true 
that I could also write a review of it without having seen it per- 
formed, without having seen it superbly performed, yes, even 
if I had seen it poorly performed. In the last case, | would be 
more correct in calling the bad performance the occasion. But 
now that I have seen it performed perfectly, the theatrical per- 
formance becomes more than an occasion to me; it is a very 
important factor in my interpretation, whether or not it served 
to correct or to strengthen and confirm my views. Therefore, 
my respect prevents me from calling the theatrical perform- 
ance the occasion; it binds me to see something more in it, to 
admit that without it I might not have quite understood the 
play. Iam, therefore, not in the usual position of reviewers 
who are shrewd enough or stupid enough to discuss first the 
play and later the performance by itself. For me, the perform- 
ance is itself the play, and I cannot delight enough in it in a 
purely esthetic sense, cannot as a patriot delight enough in it. 
If I were to show a stranger our stage in its full glory, I would 
say: Go and see The First Love [Den forste Kjerlighed].'&gt; In 
Madame Heiberg, Frydendahl, Stage, and Phister,'® the Dan- 
ish theater has a four-leaf clover that is manifest here in all its 
beauty. I call this combination of artists a four-leaf clover, and 
yet I might seem to be saying too little, for a four-leaf clover is 
distinguished only by having four ordinary clover leaves set 
on one stem, but our four-leaf clover has the distinction that a 
single leaf all by itself is just as rare as a four-leaf clover, and 
yet in turn these four leaves together form a four-leaf clover. 

Yet it was on the occasion of the occasion of this little review 
that I wanted to say something rather general about the occa- 
sion or about the occasion in general. Very fortunately, it so 
happens that I have already said what I wanted to say, for the 
more I deliberate on this matter, the more I am convinced that 
there is nothing in general to be said about it, because there is 
no occasion in general. If so, then [have come just about as far 
as I was when I began. The reader must not be angry with 
me—it is not my fault; it is the occasion’s. He might perhaps 


213 


I 
214 


240 Either/Or, I 


think that I ought to have thought the whole thing through be- 
fore I started to write, and then I ought not to have begun to 
say something that later turned out to be nothing. Neverthe- 
less, I do believe that he ought to give my method its due, in- 
sofar as he has convinced himself in a more satisfying manner 
that the occasion in general is something that is nothing. Later 
on, he perhaps will come to think about this again when he has 
convinced himself that there is something else in the world 
about which one can say much under the impression that it is 
something, and yet it is of such a character that, once it is said, 
it turns out to be nothing. What is said here, then, must be re- 
garded as a superfluity, like a superfluous title page that is not 
included when the work is bound. Therefore, I know no other 
way to conclude than in the incomparable laconic manner in 
which I see that Professor Poul Maller concludes the introduc- 
tion of his excellent review of Extremerne: With this the intro- 
duction is concluded.'” 

As for the particular occasion for the present little review, it 
is related to my insignificant person and hence, with the ordi- 
nary quality of being insignificant, dares to commend itself to 
the reader. Scribe’s play The First Love has touched my life per- 
sonally in many ways and in so doing has prompted the pres- 
ent review, which then is the child of the occasion in the strict- 
est sense! I, too, was young once, was an enthusiast, was in 
love. The girl who was the object of my longings I had known 
from very early on, but the dissimilar conditions of our lives 
led to our seeing each other only infrequently. However, we 
did think about each other all the more. This mutual preoc- 
cupation with each other drew us closer and at the same time 
put distance between us. When we did see each other, we were 
so bashful, so modest, that we were much further apart than 
when we did not see each other. Then when we were apart 
again and the unpleasantness of this mutual uneasiness was 
forgotten, our having seen each other acquired its full signifi- 
cance; then in our dreams we began exactly where we had 
stopped. So it was at least with me, and later I learned that it 
had been the same with my beloved. Marriage was a long way 
off for me; on the other hand, our understanding met with no 


The First Love 241 


hindrances that could have incited us, and thus we were in love 
in the most innocent way in the world. Before there could be 
any question of a declaration of my feelings, a rich uncle, 
whose sole heir I was, had to die. This, too, seemed beautiful 
to me, because in all the novels and comedies I knew I found 
the hero in a similar situation, and I rejoiced in the thought that 
I was a poetic character. 

And in this way my beautiful poetic life went on. Then one 
day I saw in the newspaper that a play titled The First Love was 
to be performed. I did not know that such a play existed, but 
the title delighted me and I decided to go to the theater. The 
first love—that, I thought, is precisely the expression for your 
feelings. Have I ever loved anyone else but her, does not my 
love go back to my earliest recollection, shall I ever be able to 
think of loving another or seeing her united with another? No, 
she will be my bride, or I will never marry. That is why the 
words ‘“‘the first’ are so beautiful. It suggests the original in 
love, for it is not in the numerical sense that we speak of the 
first love. The poet could just as well have said “‘the true love”’ 
or titled it ‘““The First Love is the True Love.” This play will 
now help me to understand myself; it will give me the occa- 
sion to take a deep look into myself. The reason poets are 
called priests is that they interpret life, but they do not want to 
be understood by the masses but only by those natures with 
sensitive hearts. For them the poet is an inspired singer who 
points to beauty everywhere but testifies, first and last, to the 
beauty of love. The poetic power of this play will prompt the 
love in my breast to spring forth, its flower to open with a snap 
as the passion-flower does. Ah, I was very young at the time! 
I scarcely understood what I said, and yet I found it stated well. 
The flower of love must open with a snap: the feelings, just 
like champagne, must break their closure by force. It was a 
gallant phrase, full of passion, and I was very pleased with it. 
And yet what I said was stated well, for I meant that love must 
open as a passion-flower does. This was the good part of the 
observation, because love usually opens in marriage, and if 
one is going to call this latter a flower, it may appropriately be 
called a passion-flower. 


215 


I 
216 


242 Either/Or, I 


'8But back to my youth. The day of the performance ar- 
rived. I had my ticket, I was in a festive mood, and with a cer- 
tain excitement I hurried, joyful and expectant, to the theater. 
Going through the door, I glanced up at the first balcony, and 
what did I see? My beloved, the mistress of my heart, my 
ideal—she was sitting there. Involuntarily I stepped back into 
the darkness of the parquet in order to watch her without 
being seen. How had she come here? She must have come to 
the city just today, and I did not know it, and now she was 
here in the theater. She would see the same play. This was no 
accident; it was a dispensation, a kindness on the part of the 
blind god of love. I stepped forward, our eyes met, she ac- 
knowledged me. Bowing to her or conversing with her was 
out of the question. In short, there was nothing that could em- 
barrass me. My infatuation had free play. We met each other 
halfway; like transfigured beings, we stretched out hands to 
each other; we floated like phantoms, like jinn in the world of 
fantasy. Her eyes rested soulfully on me, a sigh heaved her 
breast; it was for me; she belonged to me, that Iknew. And yet 
Thad no desire to rush up to her and throw myself at her feet; 
that would have been embarrassing to me, but at this distance 
I felt the beauty of loving her and of daring to hope that I was 
loved. 

The overture was over. The chandelier was raised; my eyes 
followed its movement; for the last time it cast its light over 
the first balcony and over her. The theater was enveloped in a 
twilight that to me was even more beautiful, even more infa- 
tuating. The curtain was raised. Once again it seemed as if I 
were peering into a dream when I gazed upon her. I turned 
around; the play began. I wished to think only of her and of 
my love; everything that was said in honor of the first love I 
would apply to her and to my situation. There was perhaps no 
one in the whole theater who would understand the poet’s di- 
vine discourse as I would—and perhaps she. The thought of 
the powerful impression made me even stronger; I felt the 
courage to let my secret feelings burst forth the next day. They 
must not miscarry in their effect upon her; with a single hint I 
would remind her of what we had heard and seen this evening, 


The First Love 243 


and in that way the poet would come to my aid and make her 
more receptive and me stronger and more eloquent than ever. 
—I looked and listened—and listened—and the curtain went 
down. The chandelier in turn forsook its heavenly hiding 
place, the twilight vanished; I looked up—all the young maid- 
ens looked so pleased, my beloved also. She had laughed so 
hard that there were tears in her eyes; her bosom still rose and 
fell in agitation; laughter had gained the upper hand. Fortu- 
nately, it was the same with me. 

We saw each other the next day at my aunt’s. The shy awk- 
wardness we usually had when in the same room together had 
disappeared—replaced by a kind of genial delight. We laughed 
a little at each other; we had understood each other, and we 
were indebted to the poet for that. A poet is called a seer be- 
cause he foresees the future. The situation provided the occa- 
sion for an explanation. But we could not decide to wipe out 
everything that had gone before. We pledged ourselves with a 
solemn promise. Just as Emmeline and Charles promise each 
other to contemplate the moon, '? we promised to see this play 
every time it was performed. I have faithfully kept my prom- 
ise. I have seen it in Danish, in German, in French, abroad and 
here at home, and I have never grown weary of its inexhaus- 
tible wittiness, the truth of which no one understands better 
than I. 

This became the first occasion for the present little review. 
By seeing it so often, I eventually became productive with re- 
spect to this play. For the time being, this productivity re- 
mained in my head, and only a single reflection was jotted 
down. This occasion can then be regarded as the occasion for 
the ideal possibility of this review. 

Very likely I would have gone no further if a new occasion 
had not intervened. Some years ago, an editor of one of our 
journals approached me and asked me to provide him with a 
little article. He had an unusually persuasive eloquence in ‘in- 
veigling people, and he inveigled a promise from me. This 
promise, then, was also an occasion, but it was an occasion in 
general and therefore had only a slight enabling effect upon 
me. I found myself in the awkward situation like that in which 


218 


244 Either/Or, I 


a theological candidate would find himself ifhe were given the 
whole Bible from which to choose his own text. But I was 
committed by my promise. With many other thoughts, also 
the thought of my promise, I took a little excursion in 
Sjelland. When I arrived at the post house where I planned to 
spend the night, I did what I never fail to do—had the servant 
bring whatever books the innkeeper could assemble. I always 
observe this custom and have often benefited by it, because 
quite accidentally one comes upon things that otherwise might 
escape one’s attention. But that was not the case here, for the 
first book brought to me was—The First Love. This amazed 
me, since out in the country the Theater Repertoire is seldom 
found. But I had lost faith in the first love and believe no more 
in the first. In the next town, I visited one of my friends. He 
was out when I arrived; I was asked to wait and was shown 
into his study. Walking over to his desk, I found a book lying 
open—it was Scribe’s plays, opened to Les premiéres amours. 
Now the die seemed to be cast. I decided to fulfill my promise 
and write a review of this play. It so happened, strange to say, 
that my former love, my first love, who lived there in the re- 
gion, had come to town, not to the capital, but to the small 
town where I was—and that solidified my decision. I had not 
seen her for a long time and now found her engaged, cheerful 
and happy, so much so that it was a pleasure to see. She in- 
formed me that she had never loved me but that her fiancé was 
her first love, and then proceeded to tell the same story as 
Emmeline, that only the first love is the true love. If my deci- 
sion had not been firm before, it became so now. But I had to 
find out what first love means. My theory began to wobble, 
for ‘‘my first love’? was immovable on the point that her pres- 
ent love was the first. 

There were motives enough; the piece was finished short of 
the final period and a few parenthetical clauses that had to be 
inserted here and there. My friend the editor promptly put 
pressure on me and held me to my promise with a stubborn- 
ness that would have done honor even to an Emmeline. I ex- 
plained to him that the piece was finished, that only some 
small details were lacking, and he expressed his satisfaction. 


The First Love 245 


But as time passed these molehills turned into mountains, into 
insurmountable difficulties. Moreover, as I wrote, I forgot 
that it was going to be printed. I had already written several 
little articles in this fashion but never had anything printed. He 
grew weary of my saying I was finished when he still could not 
receive the manuscript. I grew weary of his everlasting re- 
quests and wished that all promises would go to the devil. 
Then his journal ceased publication because of too few sub- 
scribers, and I thanked the gods; I felt at ease again, unembar- 
rassed by any promise. 

This was the occasion for the birth of this review as at. °c- 
tuality for me, as a possibility for my friend the editor, a pos- 
sibility that later changed into an impossibility. Again a year 
went by, and during that time I became precisely one year 
older. There is nothing particularly remarkable about that, for 
it went with me as it presumably went with most other peo- 
ple. But sometimes one year can be more meaningful than an- 
other, can mean more than that one becomes a year older. That 
was the case here. At the end of that year, I found myself in a 
new period of my life, in anew world of illusion that falls only 
to the lot of young men. That is, if a person belongs to “‘the 
readers’ sect,” if he in one way or another distinguishes him- 
self as an alert and diligent reader, others begin to nurture the 
notion that a minor author might emerge, for as Hamann says: 
‘aus Kindern werden Leute, aus Jungfern werden Braute, aus 
Lesern werden Schriftsteller [out of children come adults, out 
of virgins come brides, out of readers come writers].”?° 

Now a rose-tinted life begins, much like a girl’s early youth. 
Editors and publishers begin to pay court. It is a dangerous pe- 
riod, for the conversation of editors is very seductive, and 
soon one is in their power; but they deceive only us poor chil- 
dren, and then—well, then it is too late. Watch out, young 
man, and do not go too often to the cafés and restaurants, for 
that is where editors spin their webs. And when they see an in- 
nocent young man who talks straight from the shoulder,”! fast 
and loose, with no idea whether what he says is worth any- 
thing or not, but merely rejoices in letting his words freely 
flow forth, in hearing his heart pound as he speaks, pounding 


219 


246 Either/Or, I 


in what is said—then a dark figure approaches him, and this 
figure is an editor. He has a subtle ear; he can hear immediately 
whether what is being said will look good in print or not. 
Then he tempts the young fellow; he shows him how indefen- 
sible it is to cast his pearls away in this manner; he promises 
him money, power, influence, even with the fair sex. The 
heart is weak, the editor’s words beautiful, and soon he is 
trapped. Now he no longer seeks solitary places in order to 
yearn and sigh; he does not hurry eagerly to the happy haunts 
of youth to become intoxicated with talk; he is silent, for one 
who writes does not talk. He sits pallid and cold in his work- 
room; he does not change color at the kiss of the idea; he does 
not blush like a young rose when the dew sinks into its cup. 
He has no smiles, no tears; calmly he watches the pen glide 
across the paper, for he is an author and not young anymore. 
My youth also was exposed to trials of this kind. Yet I think 
I dare to testify of myself that my resistance has been bold. 
What helped me was that I had this experience at a very young 
age. The editor who received my first promise was very 
friendly to me, but still it always seemed to me as if it were a 
favor, an honor, befallen to my lot, that someone would ac- 
cept an article from my hand, as if people singled me out from 
among my peers and said: In time something may come of 
him; let him try his hand; it is an encouragement to him to be 
shown this honor. The temptation was not very great then, 
and yet I learned to know all the terrible consequences of a 
promise. For a young man, then, I was unusually armed 
against the temptation and dared to visit the cafés and restau- 
rants rather frequently. So the danger had to come from an- 
other quarter, and it did not fail to come. It happened that one 
of my cafe acquaintances decided to become an editor; his 
name will be found on the title page of that journal. No sooner 
had he conceived this idea and discussed the essentials with the 
publisher than he sat down at his desk one evening and wrote 
all night long—letters to all possible people about contribu- 
tions. I also received such a letter, drawn up in the most cour- 
teous phrases, full of the most brilliant prospects. I, however, 
bravely resisted but promised to be of service to him in every 


The First Love 247 


way in minor editing of the articles submitted. He himself 
worked indefatigably on the first article, which was to inau- 
gurate the journal. He was practically finished with it and had 
the kindness to show it to me. We spent a very pleasant morn- 
ing; he seemed satisfied with my comments, made some 
changes here and there. The mood was wonderful; we ate fruit 
and candies and drank champagne. I was pleased with his ar- 
ticle; he seemed to approve of my comments—when, as I 
leaned over to take an apricot, my unlucky star made me tip 
the inkwell over the whole manuscript. My friend was fu- 
rious. ‘‘Everything is ruined. The first issue of my journal will 
not come out on time; my credit is gone; the subscribers will 
cancel. You have no idea how much work is involved in gain- 
ing subscribers, and once one has them they are disloyal and, 
like mercenary soldiers, take every chance to desert. Allis lost; 
the only way out is that you must provide an article. I know 
you have manuscripts ready; why will you not have them 
printed? You have your review of The First Love. Let me have 
it; ll complete it. I beg you, I implore you, for the sake of our 
friendship, my honor, the future of my journal.” 

He accepted the article, and so my inkwell became the oc- 
casion for my little review’s becoming an actuality that now 
is—I say it with horror—publici juris [public property]. 


If the merit of modern comedy (especially Scribe’s), in re- 
lation to older comedy, were to be suggested briefly, it could 
perhaps be expressed as follows: the personal substance of the 
poetic character is commensurate with the dialogue; the effu- 
sions of the monologue are made superfluous; the substance 
and the dramatic action are commensurate with the situation; 
the novelistic details are made superfluous; and the dialogue fi- 
nally becomes audible in the transparency of the situation. No 
information is necessary in order to orient the spectator; no 
pause in the drama is required in order to give clues and ac- 
counts. So it is in life, where one always needs explanatory 
notes, but it ought not to be so in poetry. Then the spectator, 
free from care, can enjoy, can absorb undisturbed, the dra- 
matic life. Although modern drama seems to require less self- 


I 
220 


{ 
222 


248 Either/Or, I 


activity on the part of the spectator, it perhaps nevertheless 
requires more in another way or, more correctly, does not 
require it but takes revenge on the forgetting of it. The less 
perfect the dramatic form or the structure of the drama, the 
more frequently the spectator is provoked out of his sleep, in- 
sofar as he is sleeping. When one is jolted on a poor country 
road whenever at one moment the carriage hits a stone and at 
another the horses are stuck in the brush, there is no good op- 
portunity to sleep. But if the road is level and easy, then one 
can really have time and opportunity to look around—but 
also, less disturbed, to fall asleep. So it is in modern drama. 
Everything happens so easily and quickly that the spectator, if 
he does not pay a little attention, misses a great deal. It is cer- 
tainly true that an older five-act comedy and a modern five-act 
comedy last just as long, but there is always the question 
whether just as much takes place. 

To pursue this exploration further might be interesting, but 
not in this review; it could be important to demonstrate this in 
more detail in Scribe’s dramas, but I believe that the more pre- 
cise discussion of the little masterpiece that is the object of the 
present deliberation will be sufficient. I much prefer to dwell 
on the present play, since it cannot be denied that in some of 
Scribe’s other dramas there is a lack of perfect correctness since 
the situations drag and the dialogue is onesidedly garrulous. 
The First Love, however, is a flawless play, so consummate 
that it alone is bound to make Scribe immortal. 

We shall first examine more closely the characters of this 
play in their singularity, in order to observe later how the poet 
has known how to let their individualities become disclosed in 
lines and situation, and this even though the whole play is only 
a sketch. 

Derviére, a wealthy iron-founder and widower, has only 
one daughter, ‘‘a little miss of sixteen years.”’?* Certainly every 
reasonable claim of his to be regarded as a good, decent man 
who has much money must be respected, whereas every at- 
tempt to be a man, to be a father “‘who does not understand a 
joke,” must be regarded as unsuccessful. It is also thwarted 
by his daughter, without whose permission and approval he 


The First Love 249 


scarcely dares to regard himself as a rational being. ‘‘She twists 
him around her little finger,”’*4 and he shows an extraordinary 
talent for understanding a joke, since her capriciousness inces- 
santly plays blindman’s buff with his fatherly dignity. 

His only daughter, Emmeline, is now sixteen years old. A 
lovely, engaging little miss, but a daughter of Derviére and 
brought up by Aunt Judith. The aunt has brought her up and 
educated her on novels,”5 and her father’s wealth has made it 
possible to keep this education undisturbed by the actuality of 
life. Everyone in the house obeys her whim, the instability of 
which can be seen, among other places, in the servant La- 
pierre’s monologue in the third scene.”° Because of Judith’s ed- 
ucation, she has lived in her father’s house without much ac- 
quaintance with the world and has not missed the opportunity 
to spin herself into a web of sentimentality. She has been 
brought up with her cousin Charles; he was her playmate, her 
everything, the requisite supplement to the aunt’s novels. She 
has gone through the reading with him, has transferred every- 
thing to him since he left her at a very early age. Their ways 
parted; now they live far from each other, united only by “‘a 
sacred vow.’’? 

Novel-nurturing is something Charles shares with his 
cousin, but not her life situation. At a very early age, he is sent 
out into the world, has only 3,000 francs a year (see scene 6), 
and quickly finds himself obliged to make his education fruit- 
ful, if possible, in the world. His endeavors in this respect do 
not seem to have met with success; actuality soon reduces him 
and his theories in absurdum: the hopeful Charles becomes a de- 
bauched fellow, a black sheep, a failed genius. A character such 
as this has so much intrinsic dramatic effectiveness that it is in- 
conceivable that one sees it utilized so rarely. A dabbling play- 
wright, however, is easily tempted to interpret him quite ab- 
stractly: a black sheep in a general sense. This is not the case 
with Scribe, but then he is no dabbler, but a virtuoso. For such 
a character to have interest, one must continually have an in- 
timation of how it happened; that is, in a stricter sense than for 
other men, he has a pre-existence. One must catch a glimpse 
of this even in his failure and thus see the possibility of his de- 


223 


250 Either/Or, I 


pravity. But this is not as easily done as said, and one cannot 
sufficiently admire the virtuosity with which Scribe knows 
how to have it come out—not in tedious monologue but in sit- 
uation. On the whole, Charles is perhaps one of the most bril- 
liant characters Scribe has brought to the stage; every one of 
his lines is worth its weight in gold, and yet the poet has 
dashed him off in a hasty sketch. Charles is no abstraction, is 
not a new Charles, but one sees at once how it happened; one 
sees in him the consequences of the premises of his life. 

The yield of being educated on novels can be twofold. The 
individual either becomes more and more immersed in illusion 
or comes out of it and loses faith in illusion but acquires faith 
in mystification. In illusion, the individual is hidden from 
himself; in mystification, he is hidden from others—but both 
conditions are the consequences of being brought up on ro- 
mantic novels. A girl is more likely to become immersed in il- 
lusion, and this is what the poet has had happen to Emmeline, 
and in this respect her life is fortunate. It is otherwise with 
Charles. He has lost his illusions, but although he has experi- 
enced the pinch of actuality in many ways, he still has not 
completely sweat out his education through novels. He be- 
lieves he is able to mystify. Therefore, when Emmeline speaks 
of sympathetic feelings that are beyond her father’s compre- 
hension,” one immediately hears the reader of novels, but in 
Charles’s lines one finds no less accurate reminders of his ed- 
ucation. He credits himself with extraordinary talent for mys- 
tifying, but this faith in mystification is just as romantic as 
Emmeline’s visionary infatuation. “After eight years of vaga- 
bonding, he comes back incognito; he is intelligent by nature 
and is well read and knows that there are five or six ways to 
move an uncle’s heart, but the main thing is to be unrecog- 
nized; that is a necessary condition.”?? One immediately hears 
the hero of a novel. That Charles should credit himself with 
sufficient competence to fool such a simpleton as his uncle is 
just as it should be, but this is not what Charles is thinking 
about; he is speaking of uncles in general, about five or six 
ways in general, and about the condition of being unrecog- 
nized in general. Thus his belief in mystification is just as fan- 


The First Love 251 


ciful as Emmeline’s illusion, and one recognizes Judith’s 
schooling in both. In this respect, we gain a good idea of 
Charles’s extravagance from his being unable, despite all these 
wonderful theories, to hit upon the least thing and having to 
be advised by the anything but visionary Rinville.*° His belief 
in mystification is just as unproductive as Emmeline’s in illu- 
sion, and therefore the poet has had them both arrive at the 
same result—namely, the opposite of what they imagined they 
were working toward, for Emmeline’s sympathy and 
Charles’s mystification have just the opposite effect of what 
they believe they will have. This I shall develop later. 
Although Charles, at the cost of his illusions, has gained a 
belief in mystifying, he nevertheless has retained a trace of 
them, and this is the other thing by which one recognizes Ju- 
dith’s pupil and Emmeline’s playmate in the ill-fated Charles. 
Despite all the wretchedness and triviality of his life, he knows 
how to conceive of it in a romantic transfiguration. He con- 
templates his youth, when he went out into the world “‘as an 
extremely charming cavalier, a young man with the best of 
manners, full of fire and life and grace, exposed to vigorous 
pursuits by the opposite sex.’”&gt;! In his eyes, even the affair with 
Pamela” has a romantic cast, although the spectator very cor- 
rectly suspects that Charles actually has been a laughing stock. 
It is easy to see why I regarded mystification as the predomi- 
nant trait in Charles, for his illusion is actually an illusion 
about his talent for mystifying. Here again one sees the hero of 
a novel. There is an unparalleled truth in Charles. In compar- 
ison with ordinary folk, a black sheep like this has something 
distinguished about him; he is stirred by the idea; his mind is 
not unfamiliar with fantastic notions. Such a character, then, is 
quite properly comic, for his life is under the universal, is 
wretched, and yet he believes that he is accomplishing the ex- 
traordinary. He believes that the affair with Pamela is an ‘“‘ad- 
venture,” and yet one has the suspicion that it was she, instead, 
who has hoodwinked him; one is almost tempted to believe 
that he is more innocent than he himself believes, that Pame- 
la’s terrifying him “with tailor’s shears” was for reasons other 


225 


252 Either/Or, I 


than her violated love, indeed, that these reasons probably lay 
even outside his relation to her. 

Ultimately we recognize in the black sheep the original 
Charles on the basis of low-comedy emotions, a softness that 
believes in great feelings and is moved by them. When he hears 
that the uncle has paid the bank note, he cries out: Yes, the 
bonds of blood and nature are sacred.**? He is really moved, 
his romantic heart is touched; he gives vent to his feelings, he 
becomes emotional. “‘Of course, I thought as much; either one 
has an uncle or one does not.”&gt; There is not a trace of irony in 
him; it is the sweetest sentimentality, but this is why the play 
has such a comic effect. When the cousin begs her father to for- 
give the supposed Charles, he cries out agitatedly, with tears 
in his eyes: O good cousin!* He has not lost all his belief that 
in life, as in novels, there are noble feminine souls whose sub- 
lime resignation can only wring forth one’s tears. Now this 
belief awakens with its former infatuation. 

I have deliberately dwelt on Charles a little longer, because 
the author has penned such a perfect character that I believe I 
could write a whole book about him merely by concentrating 
on his lines. Is Emmeline perhaps regarded as the sentimental 
one and Charles, on the other hand, the worldly-wise? By no 
means. Scribe’s infinite wit consists precisely in this, that 
Charles in his own way is just as sentimental as Emmeline, so 
that both of them with equal force show themselves to be pu- 
pils of Aunt Judith. 

The old Derviére, his daughter, and Charles together now 
form an utterly fantastic world, even though in another sense 
they are all characters taken from life. This world has to be 
brought into relation with actuality, and this happens through 


* If the reader is very familiar with the play, he will have had the chance to 
delight in the poetic coincidence that has Rinville, in the first scene where Rin- 
ville portrays Charles, reproduce him with such poetic authenticity that his 
speech becomes a kind of ventriloquism with an extremely comic effect, be- 
cause it is as if the sentiment-befuddled, emotionally moved Charles were seen 
and heard declaiming these words: “Is the voice of blood only a figment of the 
imagination, then? Does it not speak to your heart? Is it not saying to you, my 
precious uncle . . .” (see scene 6).*4 


The First Love 253 


Mr. Rinville. Rinville is a cultured young man who has trav- 
eled abroad. He is at the age when it might seem appropriate 
for him to take, through marriage, a step decisive for his 
whole life. He has pondered the matter privately and fixed his 
eyes on Emmeline. He knows the world too well to be vision- 
ary; his marriage is a well-considered step that he resolves to 
take for several reasons.*” First, the girl is rich and has the pros- 
pect of 50,000 francs a year in interest;** second, the girl’s fa- 
ther and his father are on friendly terms; third, he has jestingly 
said that he would conquer this coy beauty; fourth, she really 
is a charming girl. This reason comes last; it is a footnote added 
later. 

We have considered the individual characters in the play and 
now proceed to investigate how they must be placed in rela- 
tion to one another in order to acquire dramatic interest. Here 
there will be good opportunity to admire Scribe. The play 
must be built on Emmeline; of that there can be no doubt. 
Emmeline is altogether in the habit of controlling, and thus it 
is appropriate that she is also the dominant character in the 
play. She has all possible qualities for becoming a heroine, not 
substantially, however, but negatively. She is, then, comic, 
and because of her the play is a comedy. She is in the habit of 
controlling, as befits a heroine, but that which she controls is 
a fool of a father, the staff of servants, etc. She has pathos, but 
since its content is nonsense, her pathos is essentially chat- 
ter; she has passion, but since its content is a phantom, her pas- 
sion is essentially madness; she has enthusiasm, but since its 
content is nothing, her enthusiasm is essentially frivolity; 
she wants to sacrifice everything for her passion—that is, she 
wants to sacrifice everything for nothing. As a comic heroine, 
she is unparalleled. With her, everything revolves around a 
fantasy, and everything outside her revolves in turn around 
her and thereby around her fantasy. It is easy to see how thor- 
oughly comic the whole action must become; watching it is 
tantamount to gazing into an abyss of the ridiculous. 

Emmeline’s fantasy is no more and no less than that she 
loves her cousin Charles, whom she has not seen since she was 
eight years old. The main argument with which she tries to 


226 


227 


254 Either/Or, I 


uphold her illusion is the following: the first love is the true 
love, and one loves only once. 

As an advocate of the absolute validity of the first love, 
Emmeline represents a large class of people. That it is possible 
to love more than once is admitted, of course, but the first love 
is nevertheless essentially different from every other. This can 
be explained in no other way than by assuming that there is a 
compassionate daimon who has given humankind a little gilt 
with which to decorate life. For the thesis that the first love is 
the true love is very convenient and can be of service to people 
in many ways. If one is not so fortunate as to obtain what one 
wishes, there is still the sweetness of the first love. If one is so 
unfortunate as to love several times, each time is nevertheless 
the first time. In other words, the thesis is a sophistical thesis. 
If one loves for a third time, one says: My present love is, 
nevertheless, my first true love, but the true love is the first— 
ergo this third love is my first. The sophistry consists in this, 
that the category the first is supposed to be a qualitative and a 
numerical category simultaneously. When a widower and a 
widow combine forces and each brings along five children, 
they nevertheless assure each other on the wedding day that 
this love is their first love. In her romantic orthodoxy, Emme- 
line would look upon such a union with detestation; to her it 
would be a perfidious detestableness as abominable as a mar- 
riage between a monk and a nun was to the Middle Ages. She 
understands the thesis numerically and so conscientiously that 
she believes that an impression in her eighth year is decisive for 
her whole life. She understands the next thesis, one loves only 
once, in the same way. This thesis is just as sophistical and just 
as elastic. One loves several times and each time denies the va- 
lidity of the previous times, and in this way one still insists on 
the rightness of the thesis that one loves only once.*? 

So Emmeline maintains her numerically qualified thesis. 
No one can refute her, for anyone who risks it she declares to 
be devoid of sympathy. She must now learn by experience, 
and the experience refutes her. The question is how the poet is 
to be understood at this point. It turns out that she loves Rin- 
ville, not Charles. The answer to this question will be crucial 


The First Love 255 


in determining whether the play is infinitely comic or finitely 
moralizing. As is known, the play ends with Emmeline’s turn- 
ing away from Charles, extending her hand to Rinville, and 
saying, “It was a mistake; I confused the past with the fu- 
ture.” Now, if the play is moralizing in the finite sense, as it 
probably is generally understood to be, then it is the poet’s in- 
tention to depict in Emmeline a childish, mixed-up girl who 
has the fixed idea that she loved no one except Charles but who 
now knows better, is healed of her sickness, makes a sensible 
match with Mr. Rinville, and lets the spectator hope for the 
best for her future, that she will become a diligent housewife 
etc. etc. If this is the intention, then The First Love is changed 
from a masterpiece to a theatrical triviality, on the assumption 
that the poet has somewhat motivated her improvement. 
Since that is not the case, the play, regarded as a whole, be- 
comes a mediocre play, and it must be lamented that the bril- 
liant details in it are wasted. 

That Scribe in no way has motivated her improvement, | 
shall now show. Rinville resolves to pass himself off as 
Charles. He manages to deceive Emmeline. He enters com- 
pletely into the sentimentality of the supposed Charles, and 
Emmeline is beside herself with joy. Therefore, it is not with 
his own person that Rinville charms her but with Charles’s 
Sunday best. Indeed, even if it had been the real Charles in- 
stead of the pretended one, even if he had looked exactly like 
Rinville, the entrance of this character would have provided 
no new motive for loving. On the contrary, she loves him 
with an objective, mathematical love, because he fits the image 
she herself has formed. Rinville, then, has really made no 
impression at all on Emmeline. How powerless he is becomes 
manifest in her not loving him when he does not have the ring 
and loving him again when he does have it, from which it 
seems probable that for Emmeline this ring is a magic ring and 
that she would love anyone who showed up with this ring. 
When Emmeline finally learns that Charles is married, she de- 
cides to marry Rinville. Now, if this step is in any way sup- 
posed to suggest a change in her—indeed, even more, a change 
for the better—then, on the one hand, Rinville would have to 


228 


I 
229 


256 Either/Or, I 


have succeeded in pleasing her with his own charm, which in 
the play would have to be seen to be of better quality than 
Charles’s; on the other hand, he would have to have succeeded 
in dissipating and transfiguring her theoretical stubborness 
about the absolute validity of the first love. Neither of these is 
the case. Rinville appears as Charles and pleases her only be- 
cause he resembles him. And her picture of Charles is not a 
grandiose fantasy piece that only a poetic character could sat- 
isfy—no, her ideal Charles is identified by a host of inciden- 
tals, especially by a ring on the finger. Rinville appeals to her 
only because of his resemblance to Charles, and he does not 
exhibit a single charm of his own that could make an impres- 
sion on Emmeline. She does not see Rinville at all but only her 
own Charles. She is at the point where she loves Charles and 
detests Rinville; she does not decide which of them is more at- 
tractive by seeing them—that was decided long before. When 
Charles appears as Rinville, she finds him “‘disgusting.””1 The 
spectator must agree that she is right in this judgment, but it 
does not seem to be the poet’s intention to make much of this. 
She knows that he is disgusting before she looks at him; she 
has only to look at him and finds it confirmed. Instead, the 
poet wants to show her judgment about the supposed Rinville 
to be arbitrary and therefore lets it be parodied continually by 
the father’s judgment. The father finds nothing at all appealing 
in the supposed Charles, but he finds the supposed Rinville 
very attractive—the daughter just the reverse. He finds it so 
because he wants it to be so, as she does also. That she is right 
is apparent to the spectator, but her judgment is nonetheless 
sheer arbitrariness, and the situation thereby acquires so much 
comic power. 

Rinville does not succeed in triumphing over her theory, 
either. Charles is married, and consequently she cannot have 
him* unless he wants to grapple with the authorities. She mar- 


* Another way out, perhaps, would be for Emmeline to have the idea that 
she would be content with half of Charles’s love. We have, of course, seen 
something like this in novels, and it is not inconceivable that the idea could 
dawn on Emmeline in all its clarity. It is altogether remarkable that there is no 
female counterpart to Don Quixote in all European literature. Is the age not 


The First Love 257 


ries Rinville for two reasons—partly to have revenge on 
Charles, partly to obey her father. These reasons do not seem 
to indicate a change for the better. If she does it to have revenge 
on Charles, this indeed shows that she continues to love 
Charles. The theme is altogether in keeping with the logic of 
the novel, and she can by no means be regarded as healed. If 
she does it to obey her father, then either a seriousness must 
have entered her soul, repentance and deep sorrow over hav- 
ing allowed herself to make fun of a father who had only one 
weakness, that of being too good to her, but this would con- 
tradict the whole play—or her obedience is based on the coin- 
ciding of her father’s will and her whim, and then again she has 
not changed. 

In the play, then, there is not the slightest perceptible sug- 
gestion that her choice of Rinville is supposed to be more sen- 
sible than anything else she has done. Essentially, Emmeline is 
infinitely silly, and she is just as silly at the end as at the begin- 
ning, and therefore one can be unreservedly entertained by the 
comic effect of the play, an effect that originates in the contin- 
ual opposition of the situation against her. She is no more im- 
proved at the end of the play than Holberg’s Erasmus Mon- 
tanus.‘? She is too much a theoretician, too good a dialectician 
(for every person who has a fixed idea is a virtuoso on one 
string), to allow herself to be persuaded empirically. Charles 
has been untrue to her, and she marries Rinville, but her ro- 
mantic conscience does not reproach her. If Aunt Judith were 
still alive, Emmeline would dare to come up to her and calmly 
declare, ‘I do not love Rinville, I have never loved him; I love 
only Charles, and I still say that one loves only once and the 
first love is the true love; but I do respect Rinville, and that is 
why I have married him and obeyed my father’’ (see scene 
14).*° Then Judith would answer, “You are so right, my child; 
in a footnote, the textbook sanctions this step. It says: When 
the lovers cannot have each other, they should go on living 
quietly, and even though they do not have each other their re- 


yet mature enough for that; has not the continent of sentimentality yet been 
discovered? 


I 
230 


231 


258 Either/Or, I 


lationship should have the same meaning as if they did have 
each other, and their lives should be just as beautiful and in all 
respects be regarded as a life together. This I know from my 
own experience. My first love was a teachers college graduate, 
but he could not find a position. He was my first love and be- 
came my last; I died unmarried and he without a position. But 
when one party is untrue to the other, then the other has per- 
mission to marry, but in such a way that she does it on the ba- 
sis of respect.” 

Therefore, since there is the choice between reducing 
Scribe’s play to a triviality by insisting that there is something 
in it that cannot be established or delighting in a masterpiece 
by being able to explain everything, the choice seems easy. 
The play is not moralizing in a finite sense but witty in an in- 
finite sense; it has no finite purpose but is an infinite jest with 
Emmeline. Therefore, the play does not end. Since the new 
love for Rinville is motivated only by a mistaken identity, it is 
altogether arbitrary to have the play terminate. Now, this is 
either a defect in the play or a merit. Here again the choice is 
easy. When the spectator thinks the play is over and that he has 
secured a good foothold, he suddenly discovers that what he is 
stepping on is not something firm but, so to speak, the end of 
a see-saw, and as he steps upon it he tilts the whole play up and 
over himself. An infinite possibility for confusion becomes 
manifest, because Emmeline, on the basis of her novel-educa- 
tion, is tibergreifende [encroaching] upon every qualification of 
actuality. That the real Charles was not her Charles, she has 
learned, but she will soon convince herself, when Rinville be- 
comes Rinville, that he is not that, either. Clothes make the 
man, and it is the romantic attire that she looks at. A new char- 
acter who resembles Charles may put in his appearance—and 
so on. If the play is interpreted in this way, then her conclud- 
ing lines are even profound; whereas in the other case, to me at 
least, it is impossible to find any meaning in them. She de- 
notes, then, a change in movement. Previously, her illusion 
lay behind her in the past; now she will seek it in the world and 
in the future, for she has not given up the romantic Charles; 
but whether she travels forward or backward, her expedition 


The First Love 259 


in search of the first love is comparable to the journey one 
takes in search of health, which, as we say, is always one post 
house ahead. 

It will also be found appropriate that Emmeline provides no 
elucidation of her theory, which could otherwise be rightfully 
demanded. Ifa man changes his belief, an explanation is asked 
for; if he is a theoretician, one has a right to ask for it. Emme- 
line is no lay person; she is well read; she has a theory. By vir- 
tue of this she has loved Charles; she has advanced the thesis 
that the first love is the true love. How will she make her way 
out of this? If she says that she has never loved Charles but that 
Rinville is her first love, then she contradicts herself, since she 
actually believes that Rinville is Charles. If she says: The first 
love was a childish game; the second love is the true love— 
then one readily perceives that she slips away only through a 
sophism. If she says: It has nothing to do with numbers, 
whether it is number one or number two; true love is some- 
thing else entirely—then one must ask what attraction she has 
found in Rinville, since the alert observer has not discovered 
anything other than that he was so courteous as to impersonate 
Charles in order to please her. If the play is really over, then it 
is reasonable to ask for an explanation of all this. If, however, 
it is the poet’s intention that the play be endless, then it is un- 
reasonable to ask for an explanation from Emmeline, since she 
herself has not yet arrived at a clear understanding of these 
things. 

The interest centers on Emmeline and her illusion. To bring 
about a collision is easy enough. I shall now place three char- 
acters, Charles excepted, in relation to one another for a mo- 
ment and see how far we are able to go in this way. The father 
wants to see Emmeline married and cared for. She refuses 
every proposal. Finally, he suggests young Rinville, recom- 
mends him more warmly than anyone else, even pretends to 
have made up his mind. Emmeline admits that she loves an- 
other, namely, Charles. Rinville comes, receives the letter, 
hits upon the idea of passing himself off as Charles. 

So far, the play could manage with three characters, and we 
would not lose one of the most comic situations in the play— 


232 


233 


260 Either/Or, I 


the recognition scene. Here I can promptly take the opportu- 
nity to show how Scribe has everything come out in the situ- 
ation. Emmeline never airs her sentimentality in a monologue 
but always in dialogue and situation. We do not hear her rave 
in solitude about Charles. Not until the father presses her hard 
must she confess, which contributes to making her sentimen- 
tality appear in a better light. We do not hear her in a mono- 
logue repeating to herself her reminiscences of love; that takes 
place only in the situation. Her feelings tell her at once that 
Rinville is Charles, and now she goes through with him all the 
old memories. A more comic situation can scarcely be imag- 
ined. Rinville is a man of the world, and with the help of some 
very few particulars about Emmeline’s state of mind he 
quickly sees that her cousin Charles is a very nebulous and 
mythical character. In her imagination, she has painted a pic- 
ture of Charles that can match everyone, just as the faces 
painted by one of the several Wehmiillers** match every Hun- 
garian. The portrait of Charles is just as abstract as that paint- 
er’s National-Gesichter [national facial types]. This portrait, 
some broad formulas, not to forget a little verse,* are the re- 
sult of her novel-education. Thus the imposture is made fairly 
easy for Rinville and is inordinately successful. 

A comedy could be constructed around these three charac- 
ters and their relation to one another. Rinville had perceived 
that, although as Rinville he stood in high favor with the fa- 
ther, it was nevertheless more important to please the daugh- 
ter, whose beck and call everyone in Derviére’s house obeyed. 
So he would go on passing himself off as Charles. In that way 
he would secure a foothold in the family and would have the 
opportunity to enthrall the girl for himself. He dared to count 
on Emmeline’s control over her father, and when she had ex- 
torted her father’s consent, he would so enthrall her that she 
would not hesitate again. 

The defect in this plot is obvious. To bring his daughter to 
confess her secret, Derviére must have exerted great pressure 
on her, for otherwise she could just as well have confessed it 
the first time he spoke to her at all about marriage. Conse- 
quently, the father has had many reasons for desiring Rinville 


The First Love 261 


as ason-in-law. The more zealous he is, the more tense the re- 
lationship becomes and the less probable it is that he will con- 
sent to her taking Charles. On the other hand, there must be a 
dramatic probability of Emmeline’s making a mistake. This 
the poet has achieved by having Charles expected and has so 
arranged things that she herself brings the news—and at the 
very same moment the supposed Charles is there. Her father’s 
dilemma and eagerness to conceal Charles’s arrival strengthen 
even more her belief that it really is Charles. 

Now I shall pick up the fourth character to show the excel- 
lence of the structure and how the one situation surpasses the 
other in the comic. 

Charles hurries home as the prodigal son in order to cast 
himself into his uncle’s arms, to get rid of his cousin, and to 
have his debt paid. But to accomplish all this, he must be in- 
cognito. Just as almost every situation is an infinitely witty 
mockery of Emmeline’s sentimentality, so almost every situ- 
ation is also an equally witty mockery of Charles’s mystifica- 
tion. He arrives home full of confidence in his talent for mys- 
tifying. He believes that it is he who is carrying on the 
intrigue, he who mystifies, and yet the spectator sees that the 
intrigue was afoot before Charles appeared, for Rinville has al- 
ready passed himself off as Charles. So the intrigue includes 
Charles; Rinville’s mystification forces Charles into his mys- 
tification, and yet Charles thinks that it originates with him. 
Now the play is in full swing, a crisscrossing of situations al- 
most mad in mischievousness. All four characters are mu- 
tually mystified. Emmeline wants to have Charles; Charles 
wants to be rid of her; Charles the mystifier does not know 
that Rinville is impersonating him and trying in every way to 
enthrall the girl. Rinville is not mindful that Charles as Rin- 
ville is disparaging him in every way; Derviére prefers Rin- 
ville, but the person he prefers is Charles; Emmeline prefers 
Charles, but the person she prefers is Rinville. Thus the whole 
operation disintegrates into nonsense. What the play revolves 
around is nothing; what comes out of the play is nothing. 

Emmeline and Charles counteract each other, and yet they 


234 


I 
235 


262 Either/Or, I 


both achieve the very opposite of what they wanted: she wins 
Rinville, and he, who wanted to mystify, betrays everything. 

At every theater where The First Love is performed, I dare- 
say that there is much laughter, but I think I may assure the 
theater-going public that there is never laughter enough. To 
recall an old story,® if I were to say of a person who laughed 
very heartily that either he is mad or he is reading or, perhaps 
closer to the truth, he is watching The First Love, I do not be- 
lieve I am saying too much. Sometimes one laughs at some- 
thing and regrets it at almost the same moment, but the situa- 
tions in this play are such that the more one becomes absorbed 
in them the more ludicrous, the more lunatic, they prove to 
be. Since the situation in itself is extremely ludicrous, the 
witty lines themselves show up all the more superbly. 

That Scribe can write lines is too well known to need say- 
ing. Admire him for it, but he is to be admired even more for 
the virtuosity with which he knows how to fit them into the 
situation so that the lines arise out of the situation and in turn 
elucidate it. If on a rare occasion one of his lines is a bit less cor- 
rect, he immediately buys indulgence with its wittiness. It 
must be remembered, however, that | am not speaking of all 
the plays by Scribe but only of The First Love. 

With the introduction of the fourth character, an utterly dra- 
matic fermentation commences in the material. One need not 
fear that the material will lack life but rather that the life will 
become too giddy and disinclined to obey the reins. Every sit- 
uation must have its time, and yet the play’s inner agitation 
must be discerned in it. In conclusion, I shall now show that 
Scribe is a master at this by going through the particular situ- 
ations. The reader must forgive me if I become a bit too prolix; 
it is due to my jealousy on Scribe’s behalf and to my lack of 
confidence in the reader. My jealousy on Scribe’s behalf whis- 
pers to me that he can never be adequately understood; my 
lack of confidence in the reader makes me believe that in cer- 
tain passages he does not see everything. The comic is com- 
monly thought to be more a matter of the moment than is the 
tragic. We laugh at it and forget it, whereas we often turn back 
to the tragic and become immersed in it. The comic and the 


The First Love 263 


tragic can be either in the lines or in the situation. Some people 
prefer to linger over the lines, to preserve them in memory, to 
return to them often. Others prefer to linger over the situation 
and to reconstruct it for memory. The latter are the contem- 
plative natures. Nor will they deny that a comic situation has 
something just as satisfying to the intuition, indeed, that the 
comic, if, that is, it is artistically correct, tempts one to become 
absorbed in it more than in the tragic. I have heard and read 
many tragedies, but I can remember only a very particular 
line, and this, too, concerns me less; on the other hand, I can 
sit very quietly and become absorbed in the situation. I shall 
take an example. When Clarchen in Goethe’s Egmont learns 
that Egmont is imprisoned, she goes to talk to the Hollanders 
to incite them to rebellion.*” She is convinced that her elo- 
quence will agitate them, and yet the Hollanders stand there 
just like Hollanders, unmoved, thinking only of evading her. 
I have never been able to remember one word of her lines, but 
to me the situation has been unforgettable from the first time I 
saw it. As a tragic situation, it is perfect. The beautiful young 
girl, poetic in her love for Egmont, animated by Egmont’s 
whole being—one would think her able to move the whole 
world, but no Hollander understands her. The soul rests with 
infinite sadness in a situation like that, but it does rest—con- 
templation is completely in repose. The comic situation, to be 
sure, has a similar continuance for contemplation, but at the 
same time reflection is in motion within; and the more it dis- 
covers—the more infinite the comic situation becomes inside 
itself, so to speak—the dizzier one becomes, and yet one can- 
not stop staring into it. 

The situations in The First Love are precisely of this kind. 
Their first impact already has a comic effect, but when they are 
reproduced for intuition, the laughter is quieter, yet the smile 
is more transfigured. One can scarcely keep from thinking 
about it again because it seems as if there is something even 
more ludicrous to come. This quiet enjoyment of the situation 
when one gazes into it, somewhat as a man smoking tobacco 
gazes into the smoke, is perhaps unfamiliar to some readers. 


236 


237 


264 Either/Or, I 


That is not Scribe’s fault; if that is the case, the reader himself 
is at fault vis-a-vis Scribe. 

Derviére puts strong pressure on Emmeline to marry Rin- 
ville; she admits her love for Charles, confesses the very in- 
nocent understanding on which she has lived with him, per- 
suades her father with sweet words to write a letter to Rinville 
containing a refusal. The servant is sent with the letter; the 
family refuses to see anyone; Rinville appears. Instead of in- 
structing the servants downstairs, Lapierre has put on his rid- 
ing boots. As a consequence, Rinville is admitted. Here 
Scribe, instead of having Mr. Rinville appear and announce 
himself, has from the outset achieved a not unwitty situation 
that contains just as much mockery of Derviére as of Emme- 
line. Rinville has received the letter and reads it. Here again is 
a situation. The letter is not, as is usually the case, one that is 
read to draw attention solely to its contents. It is in Mr. Der- 
viére’s house that the future son-in-law receives the refusal. 
Rinville makes his plan; Derviére comes in; Rinville poses as 
Charles. 

Here we have a thoroughly comic situation. There could, of 
course, be no guest more unwelcome to Mr. Derviére than 
Charles. Rinville has no inkling of this. His whole intrigue, 
then, turns out to be a very unfortunate idea. The situation is 
a consequence not of Rinville’s posing as Charles but of his 
having made the most unfortunate choice he could make, even 
though he must of necessity believe that he has chosen the 
best. In the next place, the situation is a consequence of Der- 
viére’s having the excellent young Rinville in his house with- 
out suspecting it. 

If one now pays attention to the lines, in and by themselves 
poetically fitting, one will again and again come to relish the 
situation in a higher potentiation, because in them the ludi- 
crousness of the situation becomes more and more apparent. 
Rinville starts out in a sentimental and emotional style. 
Whether this is artistically correct could seem doubtful. He is 
not acquainted with Charles and therefore cannot know which 
way would work the most deceptively. But he does have some 
conception of Derviére’s household and dares to deduce from 


The First Love 265 


that the character of the rest of the members of this family. If 
the beginning is regarded as incorrect, it cannot be denied that 
Scribe compensates for this weakness with the wittiness of the 
lines and the suspicion aroused in the spectator about the real 
Charles. What is incorrect about it is that Rinville’s first 
words* are so emotional that it seems as if he feared being not 
welcome, whereas Rinville, in accordance with what has pre- 
ceded, ought to believe he would be. Therefore, Rinville 
probably resembles the real Charles a bit too much. 

Despite his stupidity otherwise, the uncle seems to have ap- 
praised Charles rather well; he thinks that with money he can 
rid himself of Charles and offers him six thousand francs a year 
instead of the earlier three thousand. This makes us involun- 
tarily think of the real Charles. He would have deemed himself 
very fortunate and would have gladly accepted this offer. The 
whole scene would have ended just as emotionally as it began; 
he would have thrown himself into his uncle’s arms and cried 
out: Yes, the bonds of nature and blood are sacred. But that is 
not good enough for Rinville; he continues in the tone in 
which he began, just as Charles would have expressed himself 
if he had not needed the six thousand francs. The uncle now 
decides to approach him amicably and win him over; he can- 
didly tells him the true state of affairs, gives a eulogy on Rin- 
ville, which because of the situation becomes a parody. The 
situation reaches its consummate peak when Derviére confides 
to Rinville that he has been trying to devise some scheme for 
making Emmeline aware of Rinville without awakening her 
suspicions.* The contrast is superb. Derviére wants to devise a 
scheme, and Rinville has already devised this scheme. Rin- 
ville’s scheme shapes the situation, and in this situation Der- 
viére’s lines are heard. Derviére himself admits that he is not 


» Perhaps an alert reader might think the play could properly end here. For 
what would be simpler than that Rinville would now identify himself to old 
Derviére and thus sail with a double wind, being taken for Charles by Emme- 
line and having Derviére know who he really is—Rinville. But we cannot 
blame Rinville for maintaining his incognito before Derviére, since just a few 
words from him are sufficient to show him that, if one is going to engage in 
an intrigue, one should never have Derviére a party to it. 


238 


266 Either/Or, I 


very ingenious; his scheme is very simple, if Charles will only 
be so kind as to leave. If this scheme were to succeed, Derviére 
would have done just about the most stupid thing he could do. 

Rinville, however, does not leave; on the other hand, 
Emmeline enters with the news that a certain Mr. Zacharias* 
wishes to speak with her father about Charles, who is expected 
any moment. Her father’s embarrassment betrays everything, 
and she recognizes Charles. With this design, the poet gains a 
great deal. The first person the pretended Charles encounters 
is the uncle; he must be regarded as the one who is easiest to 
deceive. He is stupid, uneasy because Charles is coming, and 
therefore is all too disposed to believe the certainty of this dis- 
tressing event; he would never dream that anyone could think 
of passing himself off as Charles. As far as he is concerned, 
then, Rinville can be rather daring. But with regard to Emme- 
line it would be all too daring a venture, for she is always a 
good deal more sly. Moreover, it would be unseemly for Rin~ 
ville to disregard decorum altogether, and no less unseemly 
for Emmeline. Now, however, she has in her father’s embar- 
rassment the most reliable evidence that it is Charles. The rec- 
ognition takes place in her father’s presence, and Rinville does 
not have to do anything; instead of guarding his role, he can 
remain quite calm, for now Emmeline has had her eyes 
opened. She almost compels Rinville to be Charles, and to that 
extent he is without blame, and she herself is without blame, 
since her father is the one who has compelled her to take him 
for Charles. With this design, the poet has diffused over the 
situation a certain delicacy that removes anything objectiona- 
ble and makes it an innocent jest. 

The situation is no less comic than the preceding one. Der- 
viére is very nervous, and yet he himself has been the occasion 
of it all and has helped Rinville over the difficulty of passing 
himself off as Charles to Emmeline. The situation also forms 
a parody of the preceding one; the uncle could not recognize 
him right away, but she can. She accounts for it by a strange 
feeling that she nevertheless cannot define, but it was as if a 
voice whispered to her: There he is. (This voice is undoubt- 
edly her father’s voice,&gt;” which betrayed everything.) She ex- 


The First Love 267 


plains it by sympathetic feelings that she can explain not to her 
father but presumably to Aunt Judith. Who, now, is the more 
sagacious: Derviére, who did not recognize him, who had no 
inkling but who now recognizes him, or Emmeline, who rec- 
ognized him immediately? The longer one watches it, the 
more ludicrous it becomes. Here again the lines help the spec- 
tator to become absorbed in the ludicrousness of the situation. 
After Emmeline says that she had such a strange feeling, Der- 
viére follows with: “I for my part did not have the faintest ink- 
ling, and if he had not come right out with it and told me his 
name. ...”°! Such a line is worth its weight in gold. It is so 
natural and simple, and yet perhaps not one playwright in ten 
would have the presence of mind and enough of an eye for the 
situation to have it appear. An ordinary playwright would 
have had all the attention center on Emmeline; indeed, in the 
previous scene he would have ended with the recognition be- 
tween Derviére and Charles. He would not have produced this 
interaction, and yet this contributes to making the situation so 
witty. It is comic that Emmeline immediately recognizes 
Charles in Rinville, but Derviére’s presence helps make the sit- 
uation ironic. He stands there like an idiot who cannot com- 
prehend a thing. And yet, which is easier to explain, that 
Emmeline had an inkling of it or that Derviére did not? 

Now comes the recognition scene, one of the most felicitous 
situations imaginable. But the comic is by no means in Emme- 
line’s mistaking Rinville for Charles. After all, mistaken iden- 
tities have been seen often enough on the stage. A mistaken 
identity depends on an actual resemblance, whether the indi- 
vidual is unaware of it or has himself brought it about. If that 
were the case here, then Rinville, after having passed the test, 
would have to have some idea of what Charles looked like, for 
Charles, after all, would have to look somewhat like himself. 
But this is by no means the case; any such conclusion would be 
inane. The comic, then, is in Emmeline’s recognizing in Rin- 
ville someone she does not know. The comic is not in her rec- 
ognizing Rinville but in the indication thereby that she does 
not know Charles. As it went with Rinville, so it would have 
gone with any male under the same circumstances—she would 


239 


268 Either/Or, I 


also have taken him for Charles. So, then, she mistakes Rin- 
ville for someone she does not know, and this is undeniably a 
very comical kind of mistaken identity. Therefore, the situa- 
tion has a high degree of probability that one would think very 
difficult to achieve. Then Rinville is also a laughingstock, in- 
asmuch as he believes he has advanced one step further. That 
is, Emmeline’s Charles is an “x,” a desideratur [something 
wanted], and here one clearly sees what otherwise happens in 
secret, how such a little miss acts in forming an ideal for her- 
self. And yet she has loved Charles for eight years and will 
never love anyone else. 

If one comes upon a very rare line that seems a little incor- 
rect artistically, Scribe makes up for it with a witticism, for ex- 
ample, Rinville’s line ““God be praised, I was afraid I had gone 
further than I wanted to.””&gt;? 

So Emmeline recognizes Charles, or, more accurately, she 
discovers him. Whereas Rinville does not, as one would rather 
have expected, come to find out what Charles looks like, 
Emmeline does, and this is very deftly designed, since she did 
not know it in advance. The situation is so lunatic that it is 
doubtful whether one should say it is Rinville who deceives 
Emmeline or Emmeline who deceives Rinville, for indeed he 
is deceived in a way, inasmuch as he thought there actually 
was a Charles. But amid all this the point, and it is inexhaus- 
tible, is that the scene is a recognition scene. The situation is 
just as lunatic as would be the comment from a man who had 
never seen his own image and then saw it in a mirror for the 
first time: I recognize myself right away. 

Emmeline and the supposed Charles have come to the point 
in the recognition scene where they were interrupted by 
Charles’s departure; then the uncle interrupts them once more 
by his presence. From Mr. Zacharias, he has learned some- 
thing about Charles that is not especially pleasant. This now 
recoils upon Rinville. The situation is essentially the same as 
before, but we shall see what the poet has gained. Charles’s ex- 
ploits are of such a kind that if they were told bluntly they 
would interfere with the total impact of the play. It is a matter 
of giving them a certain light touch so that they do not have 


The First Love 269 


too earnest an effect. The poet has achieved this in two ways. 
The first information we obtain about Charles’s life is in scene 
nine. Here it recoils upon Rinville, who is passing himself off 
as Charles. The spectator’s attention is led away from the de- 
tails in the narrative to the mistaken identity; instead of think- 
ing about the specific episodes, one thinks only of stupid antics 
in general and of Rinville’s embarrassment and the comic sit- 
uation in his being asked for more detailed information. Com- 
plete information comes from Charles’s own mouth in scene 
sixteen, but one does not forget that Charles is passing himself 
off as Rinville. What would become far too earnest or too 
brash if Charles were telling it in his own person now comes 
to have a comic, almost hilarious, touch by his telling it in the 
person of Rinville, using his incognito to make it as fantastic 
as possible. If he told the story of his life in his own person, he 
would be required to have an awareness of it, and it would be 
regarded as exceedingly immoral if he did not have it. But 
now that he is telling everything in the person of someone else, 
indeed, in order to disturb Emmeline, we find the fantastic 
tinge of his narrative poetically correct in a double sense. 

So Derviére has obtained information that the supposed 
Charles is unable to rectify or complete. Then Emmeline dis- 
covers ‘“‘that he is no longer the same.’’? This is somewhat 
precipitous after she had been absolutely positive that he is 
completely the same old Charles. Here Emmeline is really in 
her element; whatever she says is all sheer prattle. The remark 
itself deserves closer scrutiny, because it provides the occasion 
for reveling all the more in the situation, which in all its ludi- 
crousness is illuminated from a new angle. Just the sound of 
the words ‘‘the same”’ has the effect of a new titillating ingre- 
dient in the madness of the situation. One laughs involuntarily 
because one involuntarily asks: The same as who? The same as 
the one he appeared to be in the testing scene. One thinks, 
then, of how deficient that test was. The same as who? As 
Charles, whom she did not know? Moreover, when I say of a 
person that he is the same or that he is not the same, I can mean 
this in either an outer or inner sense, with respect either to his 
exterior or to his inner being. One would assume that the lat- 


241 


242 


270 Either/Or, I 


ter would be especially important to the lover. Now, how- 
ever, it is discovered that the test was not concerned with this 
at all, and yet he had been found to be the same. Quite by 
chance, Emmeline begins to wonder whether Charles has not 
changed with respect to his character, and now she discovers 
that he is not the same. The denial that he is the same morally 
also implies an affirmation that in all other respects he is the 
same. Yet Emmeline explains herself more explicitly. She 
looks for the change not in Charles’s having become a wastrel 
and maybe something even worse but in his no longer confid- 
ing everything to her as she was accustomed to having him do. 
This must be one of her ideas from novels, which most likely 
must be interpreted to mean that she was accustomed to prat- 
tle about everything to him, as in the recognition scene. That 
Charles made a habit of confiding everything to her, she knew 
not at all from experience but from novels, from which one 
learns that lovers ought to have no secrets from each other. She 
would not be upset if Charles were a runaway convict, if only 
her erotic curiosity were satisfied by his confiding it to her. 
The attempt Emmeline makes to convince herself of Charles’s 
identity through an observation of his character must then be 
regarded as prattle, which in part illuminates her whole being, 
in part all the rest of her prattle. Therefore, she abandons this 
line of thought and obtains far more positive evidence that he 
is not the same the very moment she discovers that he does not 
have the ring. Now she needs no further testimony against 
him. She admits, therefore, that he could have done anything 
he wanted to, the wildest things, or, in other words, could 
have changed as much as he wanted to—he would still have re- 
mained the same—but that he does not have the ring testifies 
against him.** Emmeline is characterized by a singular kind of 
abstract thinking. But what she retains after and through all 
this abstraction is not so much Charles’s unalloyed nature as 
the ring. Emmeline is to be regarded as the jinni of the ring, 
who obeys the one “who has the ring in his hand.’’° 

Lapierre announces a new stranger. All are agreed that it 
must be Rinville. Emmeline is ordered to spruce herself up and 
bursts out, ““How tiresome. Must I go and dress up for the 


The First Love 271 


sake of a strange man I already know in advance I can’t 
stand!” With this line the spectator is made aware in due time 
of the irony in one of the situations to follow. On the whole, 
Emmeline can flatter herself that she is irony’s darling. It fa- 
vors her everywhere and afterward makes fun of her. She 
wants the supposed Charles to be a handsome young man, and 
irony favors her; Derviére cannot see it, and he appears the 
fool; Emmeline comes off with flying colors, and yet she is the 
biggest fool. She wants the supposed Rinville to be a man she 
cannot stand, although her father informs her that he is sup- 
posed to be an excellent young man. Here again irony favors 
her, and yet in such a way that it makes a fool of her. 

Scene eleven is a monologue by Rinville.*’ It might seem 
better to have omitted this monologue, since the effect is an in- 
terference in every way. Insofar as it was all right to leave Rin- 
ville in possession of the field of battle and be the first one to 
receive Charles, his monologue could have been shortened. 
Nor would it then have been without effect. In the words of 
the poet, the monologue could then say, “Bravo! It is going 
superbly! Quarreling with the father, quarreling with the 
daughter—I certainly have to admit that it is an auspicious 
plan.”’ This monologue would then contain a kind of objective 
reflection on the course of the play. If the poet considered it 
necessary to make the monologue a little longer in order to 
give Charles time to arrive, he could, after all, have Rinville 
make a little joke with himself about the fact that, in the long 
run, he perhaps would have been smarter to come in his own 
character, and about the drollery of thus being transmuted 
from badness to badness as new dispatches about Charles came 
in. Then it would have been best to have his deliberations be 
interrupted by Charles’s lines spoken in the wings. As Scribe 
ends the monologue, we feel too strongly that the monologue 
is now over and that a new person must come. If Rinville’s 
monologue were interrupted in this way, anew light would be 
thrown on Charles’s incredible haste, on the importunity that 
always marks his behavior, also on the breathless foolishness 
with which the poet has so incomparably stamped his first 
lines.58 


243 


244 


272 Either/Or, I 


But this is less important. The main defect in this mono- 
logue is that Rinville’s proposed procedure turns out to be just 
talk, a merely feigned movement. Rinville explains that he is 
no longer playing the role of Charles in fun. As a matter of 
fact, it never was that; on the contrary, in the beginning he 
himself gave three solid reasons for his desire to bring about 
his marriage to Emmeline. Next he explains that he wants to 
prevent Emmeline from confusing him with Charles; he 
wants to convince himself that he is the one she loves and not 
the recollection of Charles. This is of the utmost importance 
for the whole play, because it is this that decides (as advanced 
previously) whether it is in the finite sense moralizing or in the 
infinite sense witty. His procedure, then, must aim at letting 
his own (to him distinctive) charm become visible through the 
person of Charles. But this does not happen, and if it had, the 
play would have been entirely different. 

For Emmeline, everything revolves around the ring; when 
he shows up with it in scene fifteen,°? she restores him to favor, 
acknowledges him to be the same, etc. For the sake of the 
overall impact of the play, Rinville generally must in no way 
be interpreted as a poetic character, nor could this be demon- 
strated by the few sidelights that are given about him. He is a 
man who has arrived at the age of discretion, who has solid 
reasons for what he does. Now and then he appears in a comic 
light, because it turns out that his solid reasons and his sensi- 
bleness would help him very little in capturing such a romantic 
little gazelle as Miss Emmeline. Even if he were an absolutely 
charming man and dangerous for a young girl’s heart, he 
would have no power over Emmeline; she is invulnerable. 
The only way he can influence her is by coming in touch with 
her fixed idea, that is, by means of the ring. But since the main 
interest of the play would neutralize his actual charm, it is not 
right to accentuate his charm, something the poet has never 
done, either, except in this one monologue. In the scene where 
Rinville has the most to do with Emmeline, there can, of 
course, be no mention at all of any opportunity for him to 
manifest his personal charm. When a young miss has a liking 
for a man to the degree that Emmeline has for him and she by 


The First Love 273 


her own yielding continually provides him with every oppor- 
tunity to slip into her heart, Rinville would indeed have to be 
a total bungler if he could not come to her assistance. That this 
scene can be assumed to be designed for the purpose of show- 
ing Rinville’s charm is so far from the case that instead it seems 
to place him in a somewhat comic light. Rinville is obviously 
an intellectualist; in an earlier monologue he has been a bit 
pompous, has let the spectator and also his friends in Paris un- 
derstand that he is indeed the man to tame a little miss like this. 
He does in fact succeed, it is true; but if his friends in Paris 
could see how it happens, they would have no occasion to ad- 
mire his talents. His good sense tells him it is feasible to pass 
himself off as Charles. To that extent, he must be granted his 
due. Now it has happened; now he must manifest his charm. 
Now, one thinks, now he will have his hands full, and then it 
turns out that he has nothing at all to do. The fleet-footed 
Emmeline, hurrying back into childhood recollections, takes 
Mr. Rinville along, and any man who is not a complete clod 
would be able to emulate his masterstroke. 

What has been advanced here about Rinville’s character is, 
in my opinion, of absolute importance for the whole play. In 
it there must not be a single character, not a single stage situa- 
tion, that could claim to survive the downfall that irony from 
the outset prepares for each and all in it. When the curtain falls, 
everything is forgotten, nothing but nothing remains, and that 
is the only thing one sees; and the only thing one hears is a 
laughter, like a sound of nature, that does not issue from any 
one person but is the language of a world force, and this force 
isirony. — 

Charles enters and meets Rinville. The fact that Charles, this 
schemer, arrives too late, not only in relation to Mr. Zacharias 
but above all in relation to the intrigue in the play, is the basis 
of the comic in the situation. His lines, here as everywhere, are 
masterly, simultaneously just as characteristic of him as they 
are adapted to the situation. Rinville advises Charles to pass 
himself off as Rinville. He has completely sketched the idea for 
it when Charles, who cannot possibly allow anyone else to 
teach him anything about mystification, interrupts him and 


245 


246 


274 Either/Or, I 


gives the impression that he himself is the one who is contriv- 
ing the whole thing. Yet it promptly turns out that he is not a 
man who thinks of the slightest thing; he would also have 
overlooked the ring if Rinville had not called his attention to 
it. Rinville obtains the ring. 

Charles introduces himself to the family as Mr. Rinville, 
and his reception is conditioned by that. Derviére finds him 
younger and handsomer than Charles; Emmeline finds him re- 
pulsive. Both opinions are equally untrustworthy, and one 
may very well presume to think that Emmeline has not even 
felt it worth the trouble to look at him but knows it on the ba- 
sis of an inspiration. So also with the father. Therefore, there 
is in the situation a profound mockery of Charles, who pre- 
sumably attributes this propitious reception to his cleverness 
and expects that everything will be successful if he only main- 
tains his incognito. 

Now comes a monologue in which Emmeline consults her 
heart and learns that she will never forget Charles but will 
marry Rinville. 

Rinville comes to take his leave and to deliver the ring. They 
are reconciled again. We are already acquainted with these sit- 
uations. 

Now comes the most splendid situation in the whole play. 
It has an aura about it, a transfiguration; it has a festive for- 
mality of its own. One could almost wish to see Aunt Judith 
in the background as a spirit who gazes down at her two pu~ 
pils. Emmeline decides to confide in the supposed Rinville and 
to disclose everything. This situation completely exposes 
Emmeline and Charles. Emmeline’s faithfulness becomes ut- 
ter parody. Not for the whole world will she give him up; she 
will not be frightened by fire or water; Charles’s dilemma 
grows by leaps and bounds, since he wants to be rid of her. 
Such faithfulness is quite as it should be, for a little miss like 
Emmeline is usually most faithful when the beloved wishes to 
be rid of her. 

Charles, who was positive that he was clever enough to res- 
cue himself from this whole mess, since he had learned that 
Mr. Zacharias had not divulged the worst,*! now becomes the 


The First Love 275 


one who betrays everything. The opportunity is much too 
tempting. He can become the troubadour of his own life and 
hopes in this way to be rid of his cousin. It was pointed out 
earlier that the situation gains lightness because Charles’s ex- 
cesses take on a comic touch. One has a vivid idea of his irre- 
sponsibility and his intellectual confusion but does not become 
indignant, as one would if he told everything the same way in 
his own person, and yet one suspects that he probably would 
do these things. One suspects this, but one does not hear it. 
But Charles does not accomplish a thing; he pleases only him- 
self. Emmeline’s faithfulness knows no limits. Finally Charles 
confesses that he is married. The deftness with which the poet 
is able to present Emmeline ironically is unbelievable. She 
hears that he is married, and she becomes furious. Some spec- 
tators might think the reason for her being incensed with 
Charles was that she now had learned about all his bad esca- 
pades. Not at all, dear friend! You misunderstand her. She will 
take Charles if only she can get him. But he is married. To be 
sure, she would find it more appropriate if he had not looked 
at any other girl during the eight years but had conscientiously 
contemplated the moon. She, however, knows how to ignore 
such things. Let him have seduced ten girls, she will take him, 
take him d tout prix [at any price], but if he is married she can- 
not take him. Hinc illae lacrymae [Hence these tears]. If that 
was not what the poet meant, he would have had Emmeline 
interrupt Charles somewhat earlier. Charles has explained that 
he has been subjected to many pursuits by the opposite sex, 
that he has had various amorous adventures, that perhaps 
sometimes he has gone too far in being charming.© She does 
not interrupt him, promises to do everything to reconcile him 
with her father and to have him herself, for it is very apparent 
that if she cannot have him (as soon as she hears that he is mar- 
ried), she is not one to forget to sound the alarm in camp. 
Charles begins the story about Pamela; she listens calmly. 
Now comes the terrible thing—that he is married; there burst 
the kingdom of Norway.® 

The profound irony in this situation arises from Emmeline’s 
inviolable faithfulness, which at no price can give up Charles, 


247 


248 


276 Either/Or, I 


since it would cost her life, and also from Charles’s mounting 
dilemma in not being able to be rid of her. The whole scene is 
like a licitation process whereby the ideal Charles is awarded 
to Emmeline. Finally, the whole thing ends at the point where 
it is clear that she cannot have Charles and Charles cannot run 
away from his stupid escapades. 

Emmeline cries out; the father arrives on the scene, and he 
vows that he will never forgive Charles. 

Now the supposed Charles enters. Emmeline has begged 
her father not to fly into a rage; she herself will hear his confes- 
sion. Here as everywhere we must admire the poet’s discre- 
tion. The scene is bound to remain ludicrous and the situation 
ironic when we see on the supposed Rinville the impression 
that the thundering denunciation should make on the sup- 
posed Charles—that is, the actual Charles has the pleasure of 
being personally present when he is being executed in effigie. It 
would have been a poetic injustice if the poet had assigned the 
delivery of this speech to Derviére. The uncle has been 
Charles’s benefactor and has a legitimate claim not to be made 
a fool of in front of Charles. To be sure, the uncle is not as 
bright as the chit of a girl, but his benefactions over a series of 
years give him an advantage over Charles that is quite different 
from the rash promise of marriage he has given Emmeline. 
But since everything else that Emmeline says turns out to be 
prattle, the marriage vow included, it is quite in order that this 
philippic also turns out that way. Her old love for Charles is 
drivel, and her new love for Rinville is also drivel; her enthu- 
siasm is drivel, and her rage is also drivel; her defiance is drivel, 
and her good resolve is also drivel. 

Emmeline vents her wrath, and the supposed Rinville par- 
odies the effect of her speech with the facial expressions and 
gestures of the actual Charles. Emmeline’s admission that she 
actually has loved Charles can be regarded as the climactic 
point in this situation. The confusion here is complete. That is, 
the one she by her own admission has loved these eight years 
is Rinville, in whom through her feelings she had promptly 
recognized Charles, and who she later was convinced was not 


The First Love 277 


the same, but then in turn she soon recognized him by the 
ring. 

In the end, the mistaken identity is cleared up. It turns out 
that she now has Rinville instead of Charles. With this the play 
is finished—or, more correctly, it is not finished. This I have 
already discussed earlier; here I shall once again merely eluci- 
date in a few words what has been advanced. If it is the inten- 
tion of the play to show that Emmeline has become a sensible 
girl who in choosing Rinville is making a sensible choice, then 
the accent of the whole play falls in the wrong place. In that 
case, we shall be less interested in finding out exactly in what 
sense Charles is a black sheep. What we do require, however, 
is enlightenment as to Rinville’s charm. Just because Charles 
has become a rake, it by no means follows that Emmeline 
should choose Rinville, unless Scribe is derogated to a dra- 
matic dabbler who respects the dramatic convention that 
every young miss ought to be married, and if she does not 
want to have the one she must then take the other. If, however, 
the play is understood as I have understood it, then the jest is 
altogether aimless, the wittiness infinite, the comedy a master- 
piece. 

The curtain falls; the play is over. Nothing remains but the 
large outline in which the fantastic Schattenspiel [shadow-play] 
of the situation, directed by irony, discloses itself and remains 
afterward for contemplation. The immediately actual situa- 
tion is the unreal situation; behind it appears a new situation 
that is no less awry, and so on. One hears the dialogue in the 
situation, and when it is most sensible it turns out to be most 
lunatic, and just as the situation regresses, so also does the dia- 
logue, more and more meaningless despite its sensibleness. 

In order to enjoy the irony in this play contemplatively, one 
must not read it but see it; one must see it again and again, and 
if one is then so fortunate as to be contemporary with the four 
talented dramatic artists® in our theater who in every way 
contribute to disclosing and intimating to us the transparency 
of the situation, the enjoyment becomes greater and greater 
every time one sees it. 

The lines in this play may be ever so witty—one will forget 


249 


250 


278 Either/Or, I 


them. Once one has seen the situations, they are unforgettable. 
Once they have become familiar, the next time one sees the 
play one will learn to appreciate the dramatic performance. I 
know of no higher praise for the performance of the play than 
to say that it is so consummately done that it makes one alto- 
gether unappreciative the first few times because what one has 
is the play, no more, no less. I know a young philosopher®’ 
who once discoursed for me on some part of the doctrine of 
essence. The whole thing was so easy, so simple, so natural, 
that when he was finished I almost shrugged my shoulders and 
said: Is that all there is to it? When I arrived home, I wanted to 
reproduce the logical progression, but it turned out I could not 
even begin. Then I perceived that other factors must also be 
involved. I felt how much his virtuosity and his superiority 
were above me; I felt it almost as mockery that he had done it 
so well that I became unappreciative. He was a philosophical 
artist, and the same thing happened to him that happens to all 
great artists, the good Lord included. 

As it was with me and my philosophical friend, so it also 
was with me and the performance of The First Love. Now, 
however, that I have seen it performed again and again, also on 
other stages, only now am I properly appreciative of our dra- 
matic artists. Therefore, if 1 were to show a stranger our stage, 
I would take him to the theater when this play is being per- 
formed, and then, assuming that he was familiar with this 
play, I would say to him: Look at Frydendahl;® now turn your 
eyes away, shut them, imagine him standing before you. 
Those pure, noble features, that aristocratic bearing—how can 
this be the object of laughter? Open your eyes and look at Fry- 
dendahl. 

Look at Madame Heiberg; lower your eyes, for perhaps 
Emmeline’s charm might become dangerous to you; hear the 
girl’s sentimental languishing in the voice, the childish and ca- 
pricious insinuations, and even if you were dry and stiff like a 
bookkeeper, you still must smile. Open your eyes—how is it 
possible? Repeat these movements so quickly that they be- 
come almost simultaneous in the moment, and you will have 
a conception of what is being performed. Without irony, an 


The First Love 279 


artist can never sketch; a stage artist can produce it only by 
contradiction, for the essence of a sketch is superficiality. 
Where character portrayal is not required, the art is to trans- 
form oneself into a surface, which is a paradox for the stage 
performance, and it is given to only a few to solve it. A spon- 
taneous comedian can never play Derviére, for he has no char- 
acter. Emmeline’s whole nature is a contradiction and there- 
fore cannot be represented spontaneously. She must be 
charming, for otherwise the effect of the whole play is lost; she 
must not be charming, but extravagant, for otherwise the total 
effect of the whole play is lost in another sense. 

Look at Phister;”? it almost hurts when you fix your eyes 
upon the infinitely insipid stupidity that is stamped on his face. 
And yet this is not a spontaneous stupidity; his look still has an 
enthusiasm that in its foolishness calls to mind a past. No one 
is born with such a face; it has a history. I can remember that 
when I was little my nursemaid explained to me that we must 
not make distorted faces, and as a warning to me and other 
children she told a story of a man with a preposterous face, 
which served him right, for he had made distorted faces. It so 
happened, strange to say, that the wind changed and the man 
kept his preposterous face. Phister lets us see a preposterous 
face such as this; there is still a trace of the romantic grimaces, 
but when the wind changed it remained somewhat twisted. 
Phister’s portrayal of Charles has less irony, but more 
whimsy. This is altogether proper, for the contradiction in his 
nature is not as conspicuous. He is not supposed to be Rinville 
except in the eyes of Derviére and Emmeline, who are equally 
biased although in different ways. 

Look at Stage;”! delight in this handsome, manly bearing, 
this cultured personality, this slight smile that betrays Rin- 
ville’s fancied superiority over Derviére’s fantastic family, and 
then see this representative of good sense swept along in the 
confusion that arises, like a rushing wind, from Emmeline’s 
inane passion. 


251 


ROTATION OF CROPS 


A VENTUREIN A THEORY 
OF SOCIAL PRUDENCE 


I XoeuvaAos. 
189. 0.3.65 éotl névtwv mAnopovi. 
190. Zowtos. 
Kaotowv. 
GOtwv. 
XoeuvaAos. 


WOVOLHNGS. 
Kagiov. 


Xoeuvros. 


t 


uM 


191. tuys. 
Kaoiov. 
MAAKOVVTOV. 


Xeepvros. 


avdeayabias. 
Kagiwv. 


TOAYNUATWV. 


ioxadov. 


Xoepthos. 
192. prrotintac. 
Kagiwv. 
watns. 


Xoeuvros. 
oteatnyias. 


Kagiowv. 


Paxns. 


See Aristophanis Plutus, v. 189 ff. 


CHREMYLOS. 1 
ne 2 &amp; an Allem bekommt man endlich Ueberdruss. mt 
An Liebe [at last one has too much of everything. Of love], 
KARION. 
Semmel [rolls], 
CHREMYLOS. 


Musenkunst [the arts], 


KARION. 
und Zuckerwerk [and sweets]. 
CHREMYLOS. 
An Ehre [Of honor], 
KARION. 
Kuchen [cakes], 
CHREMYLOS. 


Tapferkeit [bravery], 
KARION. 
und Feigenschnitt [and dried figs]. 
CHREMYLOS. 
An Ruhm [Of fame], 
KARION. 
an Rthrei [of scrambled eggs], 


CHREMYLOS. 
am Kommando [of authority], 


KARION. 
am Gemiis’ [of vegetables]. 


See Aristophanes, Plutos, in Droysen’s translation.? 





People with experience maintain that proceeding from a basic 
principle is supposed to be very reasonable; I yield to them and 
proceed from the basic principle that all people are boring. Or 
is there anyone who would be boring enough to contradict me 
in this regard? This basic principle has to the highest degree the 
repelling force always required in the negative, which is ac- 
tually the principle of motion.? It is not merely repelling but 
infinitely repulsive, and whoever has the basic principle be- 
hind him must necessarily have infinite momentum for mak- 
ing discoveries. If, then, my thesis is true, a person needs 
only to ponder how corrupting boredom is for people, tem- 
pering his reflections more or less according to his desire to di- 
minish or increase his impetus, and if he wants to press the 
speed of the motion to the highest point, almost with danger 
to the locomotive, he needs only to say to himself: Boredom 
is the root of all evil. It is very curious that boredom, which 
itself has such a calm and sedate nature, can have such a capac- 
ity to initiate motion. The effect that boredom brings about is 
absolutely magical, but this effect is one not of attraction but 
of repulsion. 

How corrupting boredom is, everyone recognizes also with 
regard to children. As long as children are having a good time, 
they are always good. This can be said in the strictest sense, for 
if they at times become unmanageable even while playing, it is 
really because they are beginning to be bored; boredom is al- 
ready coming on, but in a different way. Therefore, when se- 
lecting a nursemaid, one always considers essentially not only 
that she is sober, trustworthy, and good-natured but also takes 
into esthetic consideration whether she knows how to enter- 
tain children. Even if she had all the other excellent virtues, 
one would not hesitate to give her the sack if she lacked this 
qualification. Here, indeed, the principle is clearly acknowl- 
edged, but things go on so curiously in the world, habit and 


I 
257 


258 


I 
259 


286 Either/Or, I 


boredom have gained the upper hand to such a degree, that 
justice is done to esthetics only in the conduct of the nurse- 
maid. It would be quite impossible to prevail if one wanted to 
demand a divorce because one’s wife is boring, or demand 
that a king be dethroned because he is boring to behold, or 
that a clergyman be exiled because he is boring to listen to, or 
that a cabinet minister be dismissed or a journalist be executed 
because he is frightfully boring. 

Since boredom advances and boredom is the root of all evil, 
no wonder, then, that the world goes backwards, that evil 
spreads. This can be traced back to the very beginning of the 
world. The gods were bored; therefore they created human 
beings. Adam was bored because he was alone; therefore Eve 
was created.*+ Since that moment, boredom entered the world 
and grew in quantity in exact proportion to the growth of 
population. Adam was bored alone; then Adam and Eve were 
bored together; then Adam and Eve and Cain and Abel were 
bored en famille. After that, the population of the world in- 
creased and the nations were bored en masse. To amuse them- 
selves, they hit upon the notion of building a tower so high 
that it would reach the sky.&gt; This notion is just as boring as the 
tower was high and is a terrible demonstration of how bore- 
dom had gained the upper hand. Then they were dispersed 
around the world, just as people now travel abroad, but they 
continued to be bored. And what consequences this boredom 
had: humankind stood tall and fell far, first through Eve, then 
from the Babylonian tower. 

On the other hand, what was it that delayed the fall of 
Rome? It was panis [bread] and circenses [games].° What is 
being done in our day? Is consideration being given to any 
means of amusement? On the contrary, our doom is being ex- 
pedited. There is the idea of convening a consultative assem- 
bly. Can anything more boring be imagined, both for the hon- 
orable delegates as well as for one who will read and hear about 
them? The country’s financial situation is to be improved by 
economizing. Can anything more boring be imagined? 7In- 
stead of increasing the debt, they want to pay it off in install- 
ments. From what I know about the political situation, it 


Rotation of Crops 287 


would be easy for Denmark to borrow fifteen million rix-dol- 
lars. Why does no one think of this? Now and then we hear 
that someone is a genius and does not pay his debts; why 
should a nation not do the same, provided there is agreement? 
Borrow fifteen million; use it not to pay off our debts but for 
public entertainment. Let us celebrate the millennium with fun 
and games. Just as there currently are boxes everywhere for 
contributions of money, there should be bowls everywhere 
filled with money. Everything would be free: the theater 
would be free, prostitutes would be free, rides to Deer Park® 
would be free, funerals would be free, one’s funeral eulogy 
would be free. I say ‘‘free,” for if money is always available, 
everything is free in a way. 

No one would be allowed to own any property. An excep- 
tion should be made only for me. I shall set aside for myself 
one hundred rix-dollars a day deposited in a London bank, 
partly because I cannot manage on less, partly because I am the 
one who provided the idea, and finally because no one knows 
if | will not be able to think up a new idea when the fifteen mil- 
lion is exhausted. 

°What would be the result of this prosperity? All the great 
would stream to Copenhagen: the greatest artists, actors, and 
dancers. Copenhagen would become another Athens. What 
would be the result? All the wealthy would settle in this city. 
Among others, the emperor of Persia and the king of England 
would undoubtedly also come here. Here is my second idea: 
kidnap the emperor. Someone may say that then there would 
be a revolution in Persia, a new emperor placed on the 
throne—it has frequently happened before—and the price of 
the old emperor would slump. In that case, my idea is that we 
should sell him to the Turks. They will undoubtedly know how 
to make money out of him. 

In addition, there is yet another circumstance that our poli- 
ticians seem to ignore entirely. Denmark holds the balance of 
power in Europe. A more propitious position is inconceiva- 
ble. This I know from my own experience. I once held the bal- 
ance of power in a family. I could do as I wished. I never suf- 
fered, but the others always did. 


260 


288 Either/Or, I 


O may my words penetrate your ears, you who are in high 
places to counsel and control, you king’s men and men of the 
people, you wise and sensible citizens of all classes! You just 
watch out! Old Denmark is foundering—it is a matter of life 
and death; it is foundering on boredom, which is the most fatal 
of all. In olden days, whoever eulogized the deceased most 
handsomely became the king.'® In our age, the king ought to 
be the one who delivers the best witticism and the crown 
prince the one who provides the occasion for the best witti- 
cism. 

But how you do carry me away, beautiful stirring enthusi- 
asm! Should I raise my voice this way in order to address my 
contemporaries, to initiate them into my wisdom? Not at all, 
for my wisdom is really not zum Gebrauch fiir Jedermann [for 
use by everyman], and it is always most prudent to be silent 
about rules of prudence. Therefore, I want no followers, but if 
someone were standing beside my deathbed and if I were sure 
it was all over for me, then in a fit of philanthropic delirium I 
might whisper my doctrine into his ear, not quite sure whether 
I would have done him a favor or not.'! There is so much talk 
about man’s being a social animal, '? but basically he is a beast 
of prey, something that can be ascertained not only by looking 
at his teeth. Therefore, all this chatter about sociality and com- 
munity is partly inherited hypocrisy and partly studied per- 
fidy. 

All human beings, then, are boring. The very word indi- 
cates the possibility of a classification. The word “boring” can 
designate just as well a person who bores others as someone 
who bores himself. Those who bore others are the plebians, 
the crowd, the endless train of humanity in general; those who 
bore themselves are the chosen ones, the nobility. How re- 
markable it is that those who do not bore themselves generally 
bore others; those, however, who bore themselves entertain 
others. Generally, those who do not bore themselves are busy 
in the world in one way or another, but for that very reason 
they are, of all people, the most boring of all, the most un- 
bearable. '3Certainly this class of animals is not the fruit of 
man’s appetite and woman’s desire. Like all lower classes of 


Rotation of Crops 289 


animals, it is distinguished by a high level of fecundity and 
propagates beyond belief. It is incomprehensible, too, that na- 
ture should need nine months to produce such creatures, 
which presumably could rather be produced by the score. The 
other class of human beings, the superior ones, are those who 
bore themselves. As noted above, they generally amuse 
others—at times in a certain external way the masses, in a 
deeper sense their co-initiates. The more thoroughly they bore 
themselves, the more potent the medium of diversion they of- 
fer others, also when the boredom reaches its maximum, since 
they either die of boredom (the passive category) or shoot 
themselves out of curiosity (the active category). 

Idleness, we are accustomed to say, is the root of all evil. To 
prevent this evil, work is recommended. But it is just as easy 
to see from the dreaded occasion as from the recommended 
remedy that this whole view is of very plebian extraction. 
Idleness as such is by no means a root of evil; on the contrary, 
it is a truly divine life, if one is not bored. To be sure, idleness 
may be the occasion of losing one’s property etc., but the no- 
ble nature does not fear such things but does indeed fear being 
bored. The Olympian gods were not bored; happy they lived 
in happy idleness. A female beauty who neither sews nor spins 
nor irons nor reads nor plays an instrument is happy in idle- 
ness, for she is not bored. Idleness, then, is so far from being 
the root of evil that it is rather the true good. Boredom is the 
root of evil; it is that which must be held off. Idleness is not the 
evil; indeed, it may be said that everyone who lacks a sense for 
it thereby shows that he has not raised himself to the human 
level. There is an indefatigable activity that shuts a person out 
of the world of spirit and places him in a class with the animals, 
which instinctively must always be in motion. There are peo- 
ple who have an extraordinary talent for transforming every- 
thing into a business operation, whose whole life is a business 
operation, who fall in love and are married, hear a joke, and 
admire a work of art with the same businesslike zeal with 
which they work at the office. The Latin proverb otium est pul- 
vinar diaboli [idleness is the devil’s pillow] is quite correct, but 
the devil does not find time to lay his head on this pillow if one 


261 


262 


290 Either/Or, I 


is not bored. But since people believe that it is man’s destiny 
to work, the antithesis idleness/work is correct. | assume that 
it is man’s destiny to amuse himself, and therefore my antith- 
esis is no less correct. 

Boredom is the demonic pantheism. It becomes evil itself if 
one continues in it as such; as soon as it is annulled, however, 
it is the true pantheism. But it is annulled only by amusing 
oneself—ergo, one ought to amuse oneself. To say that it is an- 
nulled by working betrays a lack of clarity, for idleness can 
certainly be canceled by work, since this is its opposite, but 
boredom cannot, as is seen in the fact that the busiest workers 
of all, those whirring insects with their bustling buzzing, are 
the most boring of all, and if they are not bored, it is because 
they do not know what boredom is—but then the boredom is 
not annulled. 

Boredom is partly an immediate genius, partly an acquired 
immediacy. '*On the whole, the English nation is the model 
nation. The true genius of indolence is seldom encountered; it 
is not found in nature; it belongs to the world of spirit. At 
times one meets an English tourist who is an incarnation of 
this genius, a heavy, inert woodchuck whose total resource of 
language consists of a single monosyllable, an interjection’ 
with which he indicates his highest admiration and his deepest 
indifference, for admiration and indifference have become un- 
differentiated in the unity of boredom. No nation other than 
the English produces such oddities of nature; every individual 
belonging to another nation will always be a bit more lively, 
not so altogether stillborn. The only analogy I know is the 
apostle of empty enthusiasm, who likewise travels through 
life on an interjection, people who make a profession of being 
enthusiastic everywhere, who are present everywhere and, no 
matter whether what happens is something significant or in- 
significant, shout: Oh! or Ah! because the difference between 
what is important and unimportant is undifferentiated in the 
emptiness of blind, clamorous enthusiasm. 

The boredom that comes later’® is usually a fruit of a mis- 
guided diversion. It seems doubtful that a remedy against 
boredom can give rise to boredom, but it can give rise to bore- 


Rotation of Crops 291 


dom only insofar as it is used incorrectly. A mistaken, gener- 
ally eccentric diversion has boredom within itself, and thus it 
works its way up and manifests itself as immediacy. Just as a 
distinction is made between blind staggers and mad staggers in 
horses, but both kinds are called staggers, so also a distinction 
can be made between two kinds of boredom that nevertheless 
are both joined in the category of boredom. 

Pantheism ordinarily implies the qualification of fullness; 
with boredom it is the reverse: it is built upon emptiness, but 
for this very reason it is a pantheistic qualification. '7Boredom 
rests upon the nothing that interlaces existence [Tilverelsen]; 
its dizziness is infinite, like that which comes from looking 
down into a bottomless abyss. That the eccentric diversion is 
based upon boredom is seen also in the fact that the diversion 
sounds without resonance, simply because in nothing there is 
not even enough to make an echo possible. 

Now, if boredom, as discussed above, is the root of all evil, 
what then is more natural than to seek to conquer it? But here, 
as everywhere, it is primarily a matter of calm deliberation, 
lest, demonically possessed by boredom in an attempt to es- 
cape it, one works one’s way into it. All who are bored cry out 
for change. In this, I totally agree with them, except that it is a 
question of acting according to principle. 

My deviation from popular opinion is adequately expressed 
by the phrase “rotation of crops.” There might seem to be an 
ambiguity in this phrase, and if I were to find room in this 
phrase for a designation of the ordinary method I would have 
to say that rotation of crops consists in continually changing 
the soil. But the farmer does not use the expression in this 
way. For a moment, however, I will use it in this way to dis- 
cuss the rotation of crops that depends upon the boundless in- 
finity of change, its extensive dimension. 

This rotation of crops is the vulgar, inartistic rotation and is 
based on an illusion. One is weary of living in the country 
and moves to the city; one is weary of one’s native land and 
goes abroad; one is europamiide [weary of Europe] and goes to 
America etc.; one indulges in the fanatical hope of an endless 
journey from star to star. Or there is another direction, but still 


263 


264 


292 Either/Or, I 


extensive. One is weary of eating on porcelain and eats on sil- 
ver; wearying of that, one eats on gold; one burns down half 
of Rome’? in order to visualize the Trojan conflagration. This 
method cancels itself and is the spurious infinity.2° What, after 
all, did Nero achieve? No, then the emperor Antoninus was 
wiser; he says: &amp;va6i@vai oor eeotiw ide mad te nOdyyata, 
as édeac: év todtw yao 16 dva6Lovar (Bibdtov Z., 6.) [You can 
begin a new life. Only see things afresh as you used to see 
them. In this consists the new life (Book VII, 2)].7! 


The method I propose does not consist in changing the soil 
but, like proper crop rotation, consists in changing the method 
of cultivation and the kinds of crops. Here at once is the prin- 
ciple of limitation, the sole saving principle in the world. The 
more a person limits himself, the more resourceful he be- 
comes. A solitary prisoner for life is extremely resourceful; to 
him a spider can be a source of great amusement. Think of our 
school days; we were at an age when there was no esthetic con- 
sideration in the choosing of our teachers, and therefore they 
were often very boring—how resourceful we were then!” 
What fun we had catching a fly, keeping it prisoner under a 
nutshell, and watching it run around with it! What delight in 
cutting a hole in the desk, confining a fly in it, and peeking at 
it through a piece of paper! How entertaining it can be to listen 
to the monotonous dripping from the roof! &gt;What a meticu- 
lous observer one becomes, detecting every little sound or 
movement. Here is the extreme boundary of that principle 
that seeks relief not through extensity but through intensity. 

The more resourceful one can be in changing the method of 
cultivation, the better, but every particular change still falls 
under the universal rule of the relation between recollecting and 
forgetting. It is in these two currents that all life moves, and 
therefore it is a matter of having them properly under one’s 
control. Not until hope has been thrown overboard does one 
begin to live artistically; as long as a person hopes, he cannot 
limit himself. It is indeed beautiful to see a person put out to 
sea with the fair wind of hope; one may utilize the chance to let 
oneself be towed along, but one ought never have it on board 


Rotation of Crops 293 


one’s craft, least of all as pilot, for it is an untrustworthy ship- 
master. For this reason, too, hope was one of Prometheus’s 
dubious gifts; instead of giving human beings the foreknowl- 
edge of the immortals, he gave them hope. 

*To forget—this is the desire of all people, and when they 
encounter something unpleasant, they always say: If only I 
could forget! But to forget is an art that must be practiced in 
advance. To be able to forget always depends upon how one 
remembers, but how one remembers depends upon how one 
experiences actuality. The person who runs aground with the 
speed of hope will recollect in such a way that he will be una- 
ble to forget. Thus nil admirari [marvel at nothing]*® is the 
proper wisdom of life. No part of life ought to have so much 
meaning for a person that he cannot forget it any moment he 
wants to; on the other hand, every single part of life ought to 
have so much meaning for a person that he can remember it at 
any moment. The age that remembers best is also the most 
forgetful: namely, childhood. The more poetically one re- 
members, the more easily one forgets, for to remember poet- 
ically is actually only an expression for forgetting. When I re- 
member poetically, my experience has already undergone the 
change of having lost everything painful. In order to be able to 
recollect in this way, one must be very much aware of how 
one lives, especially of how one enjoys. If one enjoys indis- 
criminately to the very end, if one continually takes the utmost 
that enjoyment can give, one will be unable either to recollect 
or to forget. That is, one has nothing else to recollect than a 
satiation that one only wishes to forget but that now torments 
with an involuntary recollection. Therefore, if a person no- 
tices that enjoyment or a part of life is carrying him away too 
forcefully, he stops for a moment and recollects. There is no 
better way to give a distaste for going on too long. From the 
beginning, one curbs the enjoyment and does not hoist full sail 
for any decision; one indulges with a certain mistrust. Only 
then is it possible to give the lie to the proverb that says that 
one cannot eat one’s cake and have it, too. It is true that the 
police forbid carrying secret weapons, and yet there is no 
weapon as dangerous as the art of being able to recollect. It is 


265 


266 


294 Either/Or, I 


a singular feeling when in the midst of enjoyment one looks at 
it in order to recollect it. 

When an individual has perfected himself in the art of for- 
getting and the art of recollecting in this way, he is then able to 
play shuttlecock with all existence. 

A person’s resiliency can actually be measured by his power 
to forget. He who cannot forget will never amount to much. 
Whether or not a Lethe?’ wells up anywhere, I do not know, 
but this I do know—that this art can be developed. But it by 
no means consists in the traceless disappearance of the partic- 
ular impression, because forgetfulness is not identical with the 
art of being able to forget. What little understanding people 
generally have of this art is readily seen, for they usually want 
to forget only the unpleasant, not the pleasant. This betrays a 
total one-sidedness. Indeed, forgetting is the right expression 
for the proper assimilation that reduces experience to a sound- 
ing board. The reason nature is so great is that it has forgotten 
that it was chaos, but this thought can appear at any time. 
Since forgetting is usually thought of in relation to the un- 
pleasant, it is generally conceived of as a wild force that stifles. 
But forgetting, on the contrary, is a quiet pursuit, and it ought 
to be related to the pleasant just as much as to the unpleasant. 
Furthermore, the pleasant as a bygone, specifically as a by- 
gone, has an intrinsic unpleasantness with which it can awaken 
a sense of loss; this unpleasantness is canceled by forgetting. 
The unpleasant has a sting—everyone admits that. This, too, 
is removed by forgetting. But if one behaves as many do who 
dabble in the art of forgetting, who brush the unpleasant away 
entirely, one will soon see what good that is. In an unguarded 
moment, it often surprises a person with the full force of the 
sudden. This is completely at odds with the well-ordered pat- 
tern in an intelligent head. No misfortune, no adversity is so 
unfriendly, so deaf that it cannot be flattered a little; even 
Cerberus” accepted honey cakes, and it is not only young 
maidens one beguiles. One talks around it and thereby de- 
prives it of its sharpness and by no means wishes to forget it— 
but forgets it in order to recollect it. Indeed, even with remi- 
niscences of such a kind that one would think eternal forget- 


Rotation of Crops 295 


fulness would be the only means against them, one allows 
oneself such cunning, and the fakery is successful for the ad- 
ept. Forgetting is the scissors with which one snips away what 
cannot be used, but, please note, under the maximal supervi- 
sion of recollection. In this way, forgetting and recollecting 
are identical, and the artistically achieved identity is the Archi- 
medean point with which one lifts the whole world.”” When 
we speak of writing something in the book of oblivion, we are 
indeed suggesting that it is forgotten and yet at the same time 
is preserved. 

*The art of recollecting and forgetting will also prevent a 
person from foundering in any particular relationship in life— 
and assures him complete suspension. 

“Guard, then, against friendship. How is a friend defined? A 
friend is not what philosophy calls the necessary other*? but 
the superfluous third. What are the rituals of friendship? One 
drinks dus; one opens an artery, mingles one’s blood with the 
friend’s. Just when this moment arrives is difficult to deter- 
mine, but it proclaims itself in a mysterious way; one feels it 
and can no longer say De to the other. Once this feeling is pres~ 
ent, it can never turn out that one has made a mistake such as 
Gert Westphaler made when he drank dus with the execu- 
tioner.** —What are the sure signs of friendship? Antiquity 
answers: idem velle, idem nolle, ea demum firma amicitia [agree- 
ment in likes and dislikes, this and this only is what constitutes 
true friendship]** —and is also extremely boring. What is the 
meaning of friendship? Mutual assistance with counsel and ac- 
tion. Two friends form a close alliance in order to be every- 
thing to each other, even though no human being can be any- 
thing for another human being except to be in his way. *°Well, 
we can help each other with money, help each other into and 
out of our coats, be each other’s humble servants, gather for a 
sincere New Year’s congratulation, also for weddings, births, 
and funerals. 

37But just because one stays clear of friendship, one will not 
for that reason live without contact with people. On the con- 
trary, these relationships can take a deeper turn now and then, 
provided that one always—even though keeping the same 


268 


296 Either/Or, I 


pace for a time—has enough reserve speed to run away from 
them. It may be thought that such conduct leaves unpleasant 
recollections, that the unpleasantness consists in the diminish- 
ing of a relationship from having been something to being 
nothing. This, however, is a misunderstanding. The unpleas- 
antness is indeed a piquant ingredient in the perverseness of 
life. Moreover, the same relationship can regain significance in 
another way. One should be careful never to run aground and 
to that end always to have forgetting in mind. The experi- 
enced farmer lets his land lie fallow now and then; the theory 
of social prudence recommends the same thing. Everything 
will surely come again but in a different way; what has once 
been taken into the rotation process remains there but is varied 
by the method of cultivation. Therefore, one quite consis- 
tently hopes to meet one’s old friends and acquaintances in a 
better world but does not share the crowd’s fear that they may 
have changed so much that one could not recognize them 
again. One fears, instead, that they may be altogether un- 
changed. It is unbelievable what even the most insignificant 
person can gain by such sensible cultivation. 

38Never become involved in marriage. Married people 
pledge love for each other throughout eternity. °°Well, now, 
that is easy enough but does not mean very much, for if one is 
finished with time one is probably finished with eternity. If, 
instead of saying “‘throughout eternity,” the couple would say 
“until Easter, until next May Day,” then what they say would 
make some sense, for then they would be saying something 
and also something they perhaps could carry out. What hap- 
pens in marriage? First, one of them detects after a short time 
that something is wrong, and then the other one complains 
and screams: Faithlessness! Faithlessness! After a while, the 
other one comes to the same conclusion and a state of neutral- 
ity is inaugurated through a balancing of accounts by mutual 
faithlessness, to their common satisfaction and gratification. 
But it is too late now, anyway, because a divorce involves all 
kinds of huge problems. 

Since marriage is like that, it is not strange that attempts are 
made in many ways to shore it up with moral props. If a man 


Rotation of Crops 297 


wants to be separated from his wife, the cry goes up: He is a 
mean fellow, a scoundrel, etc. How ridiculous, and what an 
indirect assault upon marriage! Either marriage has intrinsic 
reality ( Realitet], and then he is adequately punished by losing 
it, or it has no reality, and then it is unreasonable to vilify him 
because he is wiser than others. If someone became weary of 
his money and threw it out the window, no one would say he 
is a mean fellow, for either money has reality, and then he is 
adequately punished by not having it anymore, or it has no 
reality, and then, of course, he is indeed wise. 

“One must always guard against contracting a life relation- 
ship by which one can become many. That is why even friend- 
ship is dangerous, marriage even more so. They do say that 
marriage partners become one, but this is very obscure and 
mysterious talk. If an individual is many, he has lost his free- 
dom and cannot order his riding boots when he wishes, cannot 
knock about according to whim. Ifhe has a wife, it is difficult; 
if he has a wife and perhaps children, it is formidable; if he has 
a wife and children, it is impossible. Admittedly, there is the 
example of a gypsy woman who carried her husband on her 
back*! throughout life, but for one thing this is a great rarity 
and, for another, it is very tiring in the long run—for the hus- 
band. Moreover, through marriage one falls into a very deadly 
continuity with custom, and custom is like the wind and 
weather, something completely indeterminable. To the best of 
my knowledge, it is the custom in Japan for the husbands also 
to be confined during childbirth. Perhaps the time is coming 
when Europe will import the customs of foreign lands. 

“Even friendship is dangerous; marriage is still more dan- 
gerous, for the woman is and will be the man’s ruination as 
soon as he contracts a continuing relationship with her. Take a 
young man, spirited as an Arabian horse; let him marry and he 
is lost. At the outset, the woman is proud, then she is weak, 
then she swoons, then he swoons, then the whole family 
swoons. A woman’s love is only pretense and weakness. 

Just because one does not become involved in marriage, 
one’s life need not for that reason be devoid of the erotic. The 
erotic, too, ought to have infinity—but a poetic infinity that 


269 


270 


298 Either/Or, I 


can just as well be limited to one hour as to a month. When 
two people fall in love with each other and sense that they are 
destined for each other, it is a question of having the courage 
to break it off, for by continuing there 1s only everything to 
lose, nothing to gain. It seems to be a paradox, and indeed it 
is, for the feelings, not for the understanding. In this domain 
it is primarily a matter of being able to use moods; if a person 
can do that, an inexhaustible variation of combinations can be 
achieved. 

Never take any official post. If one does that, one becomes 
just a plain John Anyman, a tiny little cog in the machine of the 
body politic. The individual ceases to be himself the manager 
of the operation, and then theories can be of little help. One 
acquires a title, and implicit in that are all the consequences of 
sin and evil. The law under which one slaves is equally boring 
no matter whether advancement is swift or slow. A title can 
never be disposed of; it would take a criminal act for that, 
which would incur a public whipping, and even then one can- 
not be sure of not being pardoned by royal decree and acquir- 
ing the title again. 

Even though one stays clear of official posts, one should 
nevertheless not be inactive but attach great importance to all 
the pursuits that are compatible with aimlessness; all kinds of 
unprofitable pursuits may be carried on. Yet in this regard one 
ought to develop not so much extensively as intensively and, 
although mature in years, demonstrate the validity of the old 
saying: It doesn’t take much to amuse a child. 

Just as one varies the soil somewhat, in accordance with the 
theory of social prudence (for if one were to live in relation to 
only one person, rotation of crops would turn out badly, as 
would be the case if a farmer had only one acre of land and 
therefore could never let it lie fallow, something that is ex- 
tremely important), so also must one continually vary oneself, 
and this is the real secret. To that end, it is essential to have 
control over one’s moods. To have them under control in the 
sense that one can produce them at will is an impossibility, but 
prudence teaches us to utilize the moment. Just as an experi- 
enced sailor always scans the sea and detects a squall far in ad- 


Rotation of Crops 299 


vance, so one should always detect a mood a little in advance. 
Before entering into a mood, one should know its effect on 
oneself and its probable effect on others. The first strokes are 
for the purpose of evoking pure tones and seeing what is inside 
a person; later come the intermediate tones. The more practice 
one has, the more one is convinced that there is often much in 
a person that was never imagined. When sentimental people, 
who as such are very boring, become peevish, they are often 
amusing. “Teasing in particular is an excellent means of ex- 
ploration. 

Arbitrariness is the whole secret. It is popularly believed 
that there is no art to being arbitrary, and yet it takes profound 
study to be arbitrary in such a way that a person does not him- 
self run wild in it but himself has pleasure from it. One does 
not enjoy the immediate object but something else that one ar- 
bitrarily introduces. One sees the middle of a play; one reads 
the third section of a book. One thereby has enjoyment quite 
different from what the author so kindly intended. One enjoys 
something totally accidental; one considers the whole of exist- 
ence [Tilverelse| from this standpoint; one lets its reality run 
aground on this. I shall give an example. There was a man 
whose chatter I was obliged to listen to because of the circum- 
stances. On every occasion, he was ready with a little philo- 
sophical lecture that was extremely boring. On the verge of 
despair, I suddenly discovered that the man perspired excep- 
tionally much when he spoke. This perspiration now absorbed 
my attention. I watched how the pearls of perspiration col- 
lected on his forehead, then united in a rivulet, slid down his 
nose, and ended in a quivering globule that remained sus- 
pended at the end of his nose. From that moment on, every- 
thing was changed; I could even have the delight of encour- 
aging him to commence his philosophical instruction just in 
order to watch the perspiration on his brow and on his nose. 

Baggesen* tells somewhere that a certain man is no doubt a 
very honest fellow but that he has one thing against him: noth- 
ing rhymes with his name. It is very advantageous to let the 
realities of life be undifferentiated in an arbitrary interest like 
that. Something accidental is made into the absolute and as 


271 


272 


300 Either/Or, I 


such into an object of absolute admiration. This is especially 
effective when the feelings are in motion. For many people, 
this method is an excellent means of stimulation. Everything 
in life is regarded as a wager etc. The more consistently a per- 
son knows how to sustain his arbitrariness, the more amusing 
the combinations become. The degree of consistency always 
makes manifest whether a person is an artist or a bungler, for 
up to a point everyone does the same. “The eye with which 
one sees actuality must be changed continually. The Neopla- 
tonists assumed that people who fell short of perfection on 
earth became after death more or less perfect animals accord- 
ing to their merits; those who, for example, had practiced so- 
cial virtues on a minor scale (punctilious people) turned into 
social creatures—for example, bees. Such a view of life, which 
here in this world sees all human beings transformed into ani- 
mals or plants (Plotinus also believed this—that some were 
changed into plants)** offers a rich multiplicity of variation. 
The artist Tischbein*’ has attempted to idealize every human 
being as an animal. His method has the defect that it is too se- 
rious and tries to discover an actual resemblance. 

The accidental outside a person corresponds to the arbitrar- 
iness within him. Therefore he always ought to have his eyes 
open for the accidental, always ought to be expeditus [ready] if 
something should come up. The so-called social pleasures for 
which we prepare ourselves a week or a fortnight in advance 
are of little significance, **whereas even the most insignificant 
thing can accidentally become a rich material for amusement. 
To go into detail here is not feasible—no theory can reach that 
far. Even the most elaborate theory is merely poverty com- 
pared with what genius in its ubiquity easily discovers. 


THE SEDUCER’S DIARY! 


Sua passion’ predominante 

e la giovin principiante 

[His predominant passion 

is the youthful beginner].? 
Don Giovanni, aria no. 4 


Hide from myself, I cannot; I can hardly control the anxiety 
that grips me at this moment when I decide in my own interest 
to make an accurate clean copy of the hurried transcript I was 
able to obtain at the time only in the greatest haste and with 
great uneasiness. The episode confronts me just as disquiet- 
ingly and just as reproachfully as it did then. Contrary to his 
usual practice, he had not locked his desk; therefore everything 
in it was at my disposal. But there is no use in wanting to gloss 
over my conduct by reminding myself that I had not opened 
any of the drawers. One drawer stood open. In it was a mass 
of loose papers, and on top of them lay a large quarto volume, 
exquisitely bound. On the upper side was placed a vignette of 
white paper on which he had written in his own hand: Com- 
mentarius perpetuus [Running commentary] no. 4.3 There is no 
use, however, in trying to delude myself into thinking that if 
the top of the book had not been turned up, and if the striking 
title had not tempted me, I would not have fallen into temp- 
tation or at least would have offered resistance. 

The title itself was curious, yet more because of the items 
around it than the title itself. From a hasty glance at the loose 
papers, I learned that they contained impressions of erotic sit- 
uations, intimations of some relationship or other, drafts of 
letters of a particular kind, with which I later became familiar 
in their artistically completed, calculated nonchalance. Now, 
having seen through the contriving heart of that corrupt man, 
when I recall the situation, now, with my eyes opened to all 
the cunning, so to speak, when I approach that drawer, I feel 
the same way a policeman must feel when he enters a forger’s 
room, goes through his things, and finds a mass of loose pa- 
pers in a drawer, specimens of handwriting; on one there is a 
little decorative design, on another a monogram, on a third a 
line of reversed writing. It readily shows him that he is on the 
right track, and his delight over this is mixed with a certain ad- 


275 


276 


277 


304 Either/Or, I 


miration for the effort and diligence obvious here. Since I am 
less accustomed to detecting crimes and am not armed with a 
policeman’s badge, I would have reacted differently. I would 
have felt the double weight of the truth that I was on an unlaw- 
ful path. At that time I lacked ideas as much as I lacked words, 
which is usually the case. One is awestruck by an impression 
until reflection once again breaks loose and with multifarious 
deft movements talks and insinuates its way to terms with the 
unknown stranger. The more developed reflection is, the 
more quickly it can collect itself; like a passport officer check- 
ing foreign travelers, it comes to be so familiar with the sight 
of the most fabulous characters that it is not easily taken aback. 
Although my reflection is indeed very highly developed, | 
nevertheless was greatly amazed at first. I recall so well that I 
turned pale, that I was close to fainting, and therefore how 
anxious I was. Suppose that he had come home, had found me 
in a swoon with the drawer in my hand—a bad conscience can 
indeed make life interesting.‘ 

In itself, the title of the book did not startle me. I took it to 
be a collection of excerpts, which to me seemed quite natural, 
since I knew that he had always taken to his studies with zeal. 
But it contained something altogether different. It was neither 
more nor less than a diary, painstakingly kept. On the basis of 
my former acquaintance with him, I did not consider that his 
life was in great need of a commentary, but according to the 
insight I now had, I do not deny that the title was chosen with 
great discernment and much understanding, with truly es- 
thetic, objective mastery of himself and of the situation. The 
title is in perfect harmony with the entire contents. His life has 
been an attempt to accomplish the task of living poetically.&gt; 
With a sharply developed organ for discovering the interesting 
in life, he has known how to find it and after having found it 
has continually reproduced his experiences half poetically. 
Therefore, his diary is not historically accurate or strictly nar- 
rative; it is not indicative but subjunctive. Although his expe- 
riences were of course recorded after they were experienced, 
sometimes perhaps even a long time afterward, they neverthe- 
less are frequently described as if they were taking place right 


The Seducer’s Diary 305 


now and with such dramatic vividness that it sometimes seems 
as if everything were taking place before one’s eyes. It is highly 
improbable that he did this because he had some other purpose 
with this diary; it is obvious that in the strictest sense it had 
only personal importance for him, and to assume that I have 
before me a poetic work, perhaps even intended for publica- 
tion, is excluded by the whole as well as by its parts. It is true 
that he would not need to fear anything personally in publish- 
ing it, for most of the names are so odd that it is altogether im- 
probable that they are historical. My only suspicion has been 
that the first name is historically accurate, and in this way he 
has always been sure of identifying the actual person, whereas 
every interloper would be misled by the family name. At least 
this is the case with the girl I knew, Cordelia, on whom the 
main interest centers; she was very correctly named Cordelia® 
but not, however, Wahl. 

How then can it be explained that the diary nevertheless has 
taken on such a poetic tinge? The answer to this is not difficult; 
it is easily explained by his poetic nature, which is not abun- 
dant enough or, if you please, not deficient enough to separate 
poetry and actuality from each other. The poetic was the plus 
he himself brought along. This plus was the poetic he enjoyed 
in the poetic situation of actuality; this he recaptured in the 
form of poetic reflection. 7This was the second enjoyment, and 
his whole life was intended for enjoyment. In the first case, he 
personally enjoyed the esthetic; in the second case, he estheti- 
cally enjoyed his personality. The point in the first case was 
that he egotistically enjoyed personally that which in part ac- 
tuality has given to him and which in part he himself had used 
to fertilize actuality; in the second case, his personality was 
volatilized, and he then enjoyed the situation and himself in 
the situation. In the first case, he continually needed actuality 
as the occasion, as an element; in the second case, actuality was 
drowned in the poetic. Thus, the fruit of the first stage was the 
mood from which the diary emerged as the fruit of the second 
stage, with these words taken in a somewhat different sense in 
the second case than in the first. In this way he has continually 


278 


306 Either/Or, I 


possessed the poetic through the ambiguity in which his life 
elapsed. 

8Behind the world in which we live, far in the background, 
lies another world, and the two have about the same relation 
to each other as do the stage proper and the stage one some- 
times sees behind it in the theater. Through a hanging of fine 
gauze, one sees, as it were, a world of gauze, lighter, more 
ethereal, with a quality different from that of the actual world. 
Many people who appear physically in the actual world are not 
at home in it but are at home in that other world. But a per- 
son’s fading away in this manner, indeed, almost vanishing 
from actuality, can have its basis either in health or in sickness. 
The latter was the case with this man, whom I had once 
known without knowing him. He did not belong to the world 
of actuality, and yet he had very much to do with it. He con- 
tinually ran lightly over it, but even when he most abandoned 
himself to it, he was beyond it. But it was not the good that 
beckoned him away, nor was it actually evil—even now at this 
moment I dare not say that of him. He has suffered from an 
exacerbatio cerebri [exacerbation of the brain],? for which ac- 
tuality did not have enough stimulation, at most only momen- 
tarily. He did not overstrain himself on actuality, he was not 
too weak to bear it; no, he was too strong, but this strength 
was a sickness. As soon as actuality had lost its significance as 
stimulation, he was disarmed, and the evil in him lay in this. 
He was conscious of this at the very moment of stimulation, 
and the evil lay in this consciousness. 

I knew the girl whose story constitutes the main content of 
the diary. Whether he has seduced others, I do not know, but 
that seems to be borne out by his papers. He appears also to 
have been practiced in a different kind of procedure, which is 
altogether typical of him, for he was much too endowed intel- 
lectually to be a seducer in the ordinary sense. One sees from 
the diary that what he at times desired was something totally 
arbitrary, a greeting, for example, and would accept no more 
at any price, because that was the most beautiful thing about 
the other person. With the help of his intellectual gifts, he 
knew how to tempt a girl, how to attract her without caring 


The Seducer’s Diary 307 


to possess her in the stricter sense. I can picture him as know- 
ing how to bring a girl to the high point where he was sure that 
she would offer everything. When the affair had gone so far, 
he broke off, without the least overture having been made on 
his part, without a word about love having been said, to say 
nothing of a declaration, a promise. And yet it had happened, 
and for the unhappy one the consciousness of it was doubly 
bitter because she did not have the least thing to appeal to, be- 
cause she was continually agitated in a dreadful witches’ dance 
of the most varied moods as she alternately reproached herself, 
forgave him, and in turn reproached him. And now, since the 
relationship had possessed actuality only figuratively, she had 
to battle continually the doubt whether the whole affair was 
not a fantasy. She could not confide in anyone, because she did 
not really have anything to confide. When a person has 
dreamed, he can tell his dream to others, but what she had to 
tell was indeed no dream; it was actuality, and yet as soon as 
she was about to tell it to another to ease her troubled mind, it 
was nothing. She was fully aware of it herself. No one could 
grasp this, scarcely she herself, and yet it weighed upon her as 
a disquieting burden. 

"Such victims were, therefore, of a very special kind. They 
were not unfortunate girls who, as outcasts or in the belief that 
they were cast out by society, grieved wholesomely and in- 
tensely and, once in a while at times when the heart was too 
full, ventilated it in hate or forgiveness. No visible change 
took place in them; they lived in the accustomed context, were 
respected as always, and yet they were changed, almost unac- 
countably to themselves and incomprehensibly to others. 
Their lives were not cracked or broken, as others’ were, but 
were bent into themselves; lost to others, they futilely sought 
to find themselves. In the same sense as it could be said that his 
journey through life was undetectable (for his feet were 
formed in such a way that he retained the footprint under 
them—this is how I best picture to myself his infinite reflect- 
edness into himself), in the same sense no victim fell before 
him.'? He lived much too intellectually to be a seducer in the 
ordinary sense. Sometimes, however, he assumed a parastatic 


279 


280 


308 Either/Or, I 


body and then was sheer sensuousness. Even his affair with 
Cordelia was so intricate that it was possible for him to appear 
as the one seduced—indeed, even the unhappy girl can at times 
be perplexed on this score; and then, too, his footprints here 
are so indistinct that any proof is impossible. For him, individ- 
uals were merely for stimulation; he discarded them as trees 
shake off their leaves—he was rejuvenated, the foliage with- 
ered. 

But how may things look in his own head? Just as he has led 
others astray, so he, I think, will end by going astray himself. 
He has led the others astray not in the external sense but in the 
interior sense with respect to themselves. There is something 
shocking about a person’s directing a hiker, uncertain of his 
way, to the wrong path and then abandoning him in his error; 
but what is that compared with causing a person to go astray 
within himself. The lost hiker still has the consolation that the 
scenery is continually changing around him, and with every 
change there is fostered a hope of finding a way out. He who 
goes astray within himself does not have such a large territory 
in which to move; he soon perceives that it is a circle from 
which he cannot find an exit. I think that he himself will have 
the same experience on an even more terrible scale. I can think 
of nothing more tormenting than a scheming mind that loses 
the thread and then directs all its keenness against itself as the 
conscience awakens and it becomes a matter of rescuing him- 
self from this perplexity. The many exits from his foxhole are 
futile; the instant his troubled soul already thinks it sees day- 
light filtering in, it turns out to be a new entrance, and thus, 
like panic-stricken wild game, pursued by despair, he is con- 
tinually seeking an exit and continually finding an entrance 
through which he goes back into himself. Such a person is not 
always what could be called a criminal; he very often is himself 
frustrated by his own schemes, and yet he is stricken with a 
more terrible punishment than is the criminal, for what is even 
the pain of repentance compared with this conscious madness? 
His punishment has a purely esthetic character, for even the 
expression “the conscience awakens” is too ethical to use 
about him; conscience takes shape in him merely as a higher 


The Seducer’s Diary 309 


consciousness that manifests itself as a restlessness that does 
not indict him even in the profounder sense but keeps him 
awake, allows him no rest in his sterile restlessness. Nor is he 
insane, for his multitude of finite thoughts are not fossilized in 
the eternity of insanity. 

Poor Cordelia—for her, too, it will prove difficult to find 
peace. She forgives him from her heart of hearts, but she finds 
no rest, for then the doubt awakens: she was the one who 
broke the engagement; she was the occasion of the calamity; it 
was her pride that craved the unusual. Then she repents, but 
she finds no rest, for then the accusing thoughts acquit her of 
the charges: he was the one who with his cunning instilled this 
plan into her soul. Then she hates; her heart finds relief in 
curses, but she finds no repose. Once again she reproaches her- 
self—reproaches herself because she has hated, she who herself 
is a sinner, reproaches herself because regardless of how cun- 
ning he was she nevertheless always remains guilty. It is op- 
pressive for her that he has deceived her, but still more oppres- 
sive, One is almost tempted to say, that he has awakened 
multiple-tongued reflection, that he has so developed her es- 
thetically that she no longer listens humbly to one voice but is 
able to hear the many voices at the same time. Then recollec- 
tion awakens in her soul, and she forgets blame and guilt; she 
recollects the beautiful moments, and she is dazed in an unnat- 
ural exaltation. At such moments, she not only recalls him, 
she perceives him with a clairvoyance that only shows how 
highly developed she is. Then she does not see the criminal in 
him, but neither does she see the noble person—she feels him 
only esthetically. °She once wrote me a letter in which she 
comments on him. “He was sometimes so intellectual that I 
felt myself annihilated as a woman; at other times he was so 
wild and passionate, so desiring, that I almost trembled before 
him. At times I was like a stranger to him; at times he surren- 
dered completely. Then when I threw my arms around him, 
everything changed, and I embraced a cloud.'* I knew this 
expression before I knew him, but he taught me to understand 
it; when I use it, I always think of him, just as every thought I 
think is only through him. I have always loved music; he was 


281 


I 
282 


310 Either/Or, I 


a matchless instrument, always sensitive; he had a range such 
as no other instrument has. He was the quintessence of all feel- 
ings and moods, no thought was too sublime for him, none 
too desperate. He could roar like an autumn storm; he could 
whisper inaudibly. Not a word of mine was without effect, 
and nevertheless I cannot say that my words did not fall short 
in their effect, because it was impossible for me to know what 
they would do. With an indescribable but cryptic, blissful, un- 
nameable anxiety, I listened to this music I myself had evoked 
and yet did not evoke; always there was harmony, always I 
was enraptured by him.” 

Terrible it is for her; more terrible it will be for him—this I 
can conclude from the fact that I myself can scarcely control 
the anxiety that grips me every time I think about the affair. I, 
too, am carried along into that kingdom of mist, into that 
dreamland where one is frightened by one’s own shadow at 
every moment. Often I futilely try to tear myself away from 
it; I follow along like an ominous shape, like an accuser who 
cannot speak. How strange! He has spread the deepest se- 
crecy over everything, and yet there is an even deeper secrecy, 
that I myself am in on the secret and that I came to know it in 
an unlawful way. To forget the whole thing is not possible. I 
have sometimes thought of talking to him about it. But what 
would be the use—he would either disclaim everything and in- 
sist that the diary was a literary venture, or he would enjoin me 
to silence, something I cannot deny him in view of the way in 
which I came to know about it. There is nothing that involves 
so much seduction and so much malediction as a secret. 

From Cordelia I have received a collection of letters. 
Whether it is all of them, I do not know, although it seemed to 
me that she once gave me to understand that she herself had 
confiscated some. '*I have copied them and shall interleave 
them in my fair copy. Admittedly, they are not dated, but 
even if they were it would not help me much, since the diary 
becomes more and more sparse as it proceeds. In fact, at last 
with only a single exception it abandons dates altogether, as if 
the story in its development became so qualitatively signifi- 
cant that, although historically actual, it came so close to being 


The Seducer’s Diary 311 


idea that specifications of time became unimportant. What did 
help me, however, was that I found here and there in the diary 
some words that I did not grasp at first. But by relating them 
to the letters I perceived that they are the themes in them. Thus 
it will be easy for me to interleave them in the right places, 
since I shall always insert the letter where there is an allusion 
to the theme. If I had not discovered these guiding clues, I 
would have been guilty of a misunderstanding, for it probably 
would not have occurred to me—as the diary now seems to in- 
dicate—that at times the letters succeeded one another at such 
short intervals that she seems to have received several in one 
day. If] had pursued my own thinking, I would probably have 
dispersed them more evenly and not suspected the effect he 
achieved through the passionate energy with which he used 
this and every means to hold Cordelia at the pinnacle of pas- 
sion. 

In addition to the complete information about his relation to 
Cordelia, the diary has several little word pictures interwoven 
here and there. Wherever such a piece is found, there is an 
“NB” in the margin. These word pictures have nothing at al] 
to do with Cordelia’s story but have given me a vivid idea of 
the meaning of an expression he often used, even though I 
formerly understood it in another way: One should always 
have a little line out on the side. If an earlier volume of this di- 
ary had fallen into my hands, I probably would have encoun- 
tered several of these, which in the margin he himself calls: ac- 
tiones in distans [actions at a distance],'’ for he himself declares 
that Cordelia occupied him too much for him really to have 
time to look around. 

'8Shortly after he had left Cordelia, he received from her a 
couple letters that he sent back unopened. These were among 
the letters Cordelia turned over to me. She herself had broken 
the seal, and I take the liberty of making a copy of them. She 
has never spoken of their contents to me, but whenever she 
mentioned her relation to Johannes she used to recite a little 
verse, from Goethe as far as I know—a verse that seemed to 
mean something different to her according to the difference of 
her mood and the varied diction conditioned thereby. 


I 
283 


284 


312 Either/Or, I 


Gehe, (Go, 
Verschmahe Scorn 

Die Treue, Faithfulness, 
Die Reue Regret 

Kommt nach Will follow].'9 


The letters read as follows: 


Johannes, 

Never will I call you “‘my Johannes,” for I certainly realize 
you never have been that, and I am punished harshly enough 
for having once been gladdened in my soul by this thought, 
and yet I do call you ‘‘mine’’: my seducer, my deceiver, my en- 
emy, my murderer, the source of my unhappiness, the tomb 
of my joy, the abyss of my unhappiness. I call you “mine” and 
call myself “yours,” and as it once flattered your ear, proudly 
inclined to my adoration, so shall it now sound as a curse upon 
you, a curse for all eternity. Do not look forward to my plan- 
ning to pursue you or to arm myself with a dagger in order to 
provoke your ridicule! Flee where you will, Iam still yours; go 
to the ends of the earth,”? I am still yours. Love a hundred 
others, I am still yours—indeed, in the hour of death, I am 
yours. The very language I use against you must demonstrate 
to you that Iam yours. You have had the audacity to deceive a 
person in such a way that you have become everything to me, 
so that I would rejoice solely in being your slave. Yours I am, 
yours, yours, your curse. 


Your CORDELIA 


Johannes, 

There was a rich man; he had great flocks and herds of live- 
stock large and small. There was a poor little maiden; she pos- 
sessed but a single lamb;”! it ate from her hand and drank from 
her cup. You were the rich man, rich in all the glories of the 
world; I was the poor one who possessed only my love. You 
took it, you delighted in it. Then desire beckoned you, and 
you sacrificed the little that I possessed—you could sacrifice 


The Seducer’s Diary 313 


nothing of your own. There was a rich man; he possessed 
great flocks and herds. There was a poor little maiden, she pos- 


sessed only her love. 
Your CORDELIA 


Johannes, 

Is there no hope at all, then? Might your love never awaken 
again? That you did love me, I know, even though I do not 
know what it is that makes me sure of it. I will wait, however 
long the time is for me; I will wait, wait until you are tired of 
loving others. Then your love for me will rise again from its 
grave; then I will love you as always, thank you as always, as 
before, O Johannes, as before! Johannes, is your heartless cold- 
ness toward me, is it your true nature? Was your love, your 
rich love, a lie and a falsehood; are you now yourself again! 
Have patience with my love; forgive me for continuing to love 
you. I know that my love is a burden to you, but there will still 
come a time when you will come back to your Cordelia. Your 
Cordelia! Hear this imploring word! Your Cordelia. 


Your CORDELIA 


Even though Cordelia did not possess the admired range of 
her Johannes, it is clear that she was not without modulation. 
Her mood is clearly impressed upon every one of the letters, 
even though she was somewhat lacking in clarity of exposi- 
tion. This is especially true of the second letter, where one sus- 
pects rather than actually understands her meaning, but for me 
this deficiency makes it very moving. 


2A pril 4 

Take care, my beautiful stranger! Take care! To step out of 

a carriage is not such a simple matter; at times it is a decisive 
step. I could lend you a novel by Tieck™4 in which you would 
see that in dismounting from a horse a lady became so in- 
volved in a complicated situation that this step became defini- 
tive for her entire life. Indeed, carriage steps usually are so ill- 
contrived that one is almost compelled to abandon all grace 


285 


I 
286 


287 


314 Either/Or, I 


and to hazard a desperate leap into the arms of the coachman 
and servant. Yes, what a good deal a coachman and servants 
have! I do believe I shall try to find a job as a servant in a house 
where there are young girls; a servant easily comes to know 
the secrets of such a little miss. —But for God’s sake don’t 
leap, I beg of you. It is very dark; I shall not disturb you. Iam 
simply going to stand under this street light; then you will be 
unable to see me, and invariably one is embarrassed only to the 
degree that one is seen, but invariably one is seen only to the 
degree that one sees. Therefore, out of concern for the servant, 
who perhaps will not be able to withstand such a leap, out of 
concern for the silk dress, also out of concern for the lace 
fringes, out of concern for me, let this charming tiny foot, 
whose daintiness I have already admired, let it try itself in the 
world, risk reliance upon it; it will certainly find firm footing, 
and if you shudder for a moment because it seems as if your 
foot sought in vain something to rest upon, if you still shudder 
after it has found it, then quickly put the other foot down be- 
side it. Who, after all, would be so cruel as to leave you sus- 
pended in this position, who so ungracious, so slow to re- 
spond to the revelation of beauty. Or do you still fear some 
outsider—but certainly not the servant, or me, either, for in- 
deed I have already seen the tiny foot, and since I am a natural 
scientist I have learned from Cuvier®&gt; how to draw conclu- 
sions from it with certainty. So please hurry! How this anxiety 
does enhance your beauty! But anxiety in and by itself is not 
beautiful; it is so only when at the same time one sees the en- 
ergy that overcomes it. There! How firmly this tiny foot is 
standing now. I have noticed that girls with tiny feet usually 
stand more firmly than the more pedestrian big-footed ones. 
Now who would have thought it? It goes against all expe- 
rience; the danger of a dress catching is not nearly as great 
when one steps out as when one leaps out. But then it is always 
precarious for girls to go driving in a carriage; they end up 
staying in it. The lace and trimmings are lost, and that’s that. 
No one has seen anything. True, a dark figure appears, enve- 
loped to the eyes in a cape. It is not possible to see where he is 
coming from, for the light is shining right in one’s eyes. He 


The Seducer’s Diary 315 


passes by you just as you are entering the front door. At pre- 
cisely the crucial moment a sidelong glance falls on its object. 
You blush; your bosom is too full to unburden itself in a single 
breath. There is indignation in your glance, a proud contempt. 
There is a plea, a tear in your eye; both are equally beautiful. I 
accept them both with equal right, for I can just as well be the 
one as the other. 

But I am being mean. What is the number of the house? 
What do I see? A public display of fancy articles. My beautiful 
stranger, it may be shocking on my part, but I am following 


the bright path...... She has forgotten what happened— ~ 


ah, yes, when one is seventeen years old, when one goes shop- 
ping in this happy age, when every single large or little object 
picked up gives unspeakable delight, then one readily forgets. 
As yet she has not seen me; I am standing at the other end of 
the counter, far off by myself. There is a mirror on the oppo- 
site wall; she is not contemplating it, but the mirror is contem- 
plating her. How faithfully it has caught her image, like a 
humble slave who shows his devotion by his faithfulness, a 
slave for whom she certainly has significance but who has no 
significance for her, who indeed dares to capture her but not to 
hold her. Unhappy mirror, which assuredly can grasp her im- 
age but not her; unhappy mirror, which cannot secretly hide 
her image in itself, hide it from the whole world, but can only 
disclose it to others as it now does to me. What torture ifa hu- 
man being were fashioned that way. And yet are there not 
many people who are like that, who possess nothing except at 
the moment when they are showing it to others, who merely 
grasp the surface, not the essence, lose everything when this is 
going to show itself, just as this mirror would lose her image 
if she were to disclose her heart to it by a single breath. And if 
a person were unable to possess an image in recollection at the 
very moment of presence, he must ever wish to be at a distance 
from beauty, not so close that the mortal eyes cannot see the 
beauty of that which he holds in his embrace and which the ex- 
ternal eyes have lost, which he, to be sure, can regain for the 
external vision by distancing himself from it, but which he 
can, in fact, have before the eye of his soul when he cannot see 


288 


289 


316 Either/Or, I 


the object because it is too close to him, when lips are clinging 
tolips...... How beautiful she is! Poor mirror, it must be 
tormenting—it is good that you do not know jealousy. Her 
head is perfectly oval; she tilts it a little, thereby accentuating 
her forehead, which rises pure and proud without any deline- 
ation of the powers of understanding. Her dark hair rings her 
forehead softly and gently. Her countenance is like a fruit, 
every angle fully rounded; her skin is transparent, like velvet 
to the touch—that I can feel with my eyes. Her eyes—yes, I 
have not even seen them; they are hidden by lids armed with 
silken fringes that are bent like barbs, dangerous to anyone 
who wishes to meet her glance. Her head is a Madonna head, 
purity and innocence its mark. She is bowed down like a Ma- 
donna, but she is not lost in contemplation of the One; this 
causes the expression in her face to vary. What she is contem- 
plating is multiplicity, the multiplicity over which earthly 
pomp and glory cast a reflection. She takes off her glove to 
show to the mirror and me a right hand as white and shapely 
as that of an ancient statue, without any ornaments, not even 
a flat gold ring on the fourth finger?”—bravo! She raises her 
eyes—how changed everything is, and yet the same—the fore- 
head a little less high, the face a little less uniformly oval but 
more vital.?8 She is speaking with the store clerk; she is lively, 
cheerful, talkative. She has already chosen one, two, three ar- 
ticles; she picks up a fourth. She is holding it in her hand; her 
eyes look down again; she is asking what it costs. She lays it 
aside under the glove; it must surely be a secret, intended for— 
a sweetheart? But she is not engaged. Ah, but there are many 
who are not engaged and yet have a sweetheart, many who are 
engaged and yet do not have asweetheart...... Should I re- 
linquish her? Should I leave her undisturbed in her delight? She 
wants to pay but she has lost her purse—presumably she is 
giving her address. I do not wish to hear it; I do not wish to 
deprive myself of the surprise. I certainly shall meet her again 
sometime; I certainly shall recognize her, and she may recog- 
nize me—my sidelong glance is not forgotten so easily. Then 
when J am taken by surprise upon meeting her in surround- 
ings I did not expect, her turn will come. If she does not know 


The Seducer’s Diary 317 


me, if her glance does not immediately convince me of that, 
then I certainly shall find occasion to look at her from the 
side—I promise that she will recall the situation. No impa- 
tience, no greediness—everything will be relished in slow 
draughts; she is selected, she will be overtaken. 


°The fifth 

This I do like: alone in the evening on Ostergade. Yes, I do 
see your servant following along. Now, do not believe that I 
think so ill of you as to imagine that you would go walking all 
alone; do not believe that I am so inexperienced that in my sur- 
vey of the situation I have not immediately observed this por- 
tentous figure. But why, then, the hurry? You are indeed a lit- 
tle uneasy; you feel a certain beating of the heart, not because 
of an impatient longing to go home but because of an impa- 
tient fear running through your whole body with its sweet dis- 
quietude, and therefore the quick tempo of the feet. But never- 
theless it is marvelous, inestimably so, to go walking alone— 
with the servant in tow. ..... One is sixteen years old; one 
is well read—that is, in novels; in walking through the broth- 
ers’ room by chance one has overheard some words in a con- 
versation between them and their acquaintances, something 
about Wstergade. Later one scurried through several times to 
pick up more information, if possible. But in vain. Yet one 
should—as befits a big, grown-up girl—know a little bit about 
the world. If one could just go walking without any fuss and 
with the servant following behind. Yes, that’s all very fine— 
but Father and Mother would surely look askance at that, and 
what reason can one give? When one is going to a party, there 
is no chance for it; it is a bit too early, because I overheard Au- 
gust say around nine or ten o’clock. When it is time to go 
home, it is too late, and usually there has to be a gentleman es- 
cort to drag along. Thursday evening when we leave the thea- 
ter would really be an excellent opportunity, but then I always 
have to ride in the carriage and have Mrs. Thomsen and her 
charming cousins packed in with me. IfI could just ride alone, 
then I could open the window and look around a little. But 
often the unhoped for happens. Today Mother said to me: I do 


i 
290 


291 


318 Either/Or, I 


not think you will be finished with what you are sewing for 
your father’s birthday. In order to be entirely undisturbed, 
you may go over to Aunt Jette’s and stay until tea time, and 
Jens will come and fetch you. It really was not exactly pleasant 
news, for it is very boring at Aunt Jette’s, but then I shall be 
walking home alone at nine o’clock with the servant. Then 
when Jens comes, he will have to wait until a quarter past nine, 
and then we'll be off. Only I might meet my brother or Au- 
gust—but that would not be so good, for then I probably 
would be escorted home. Thanks, but we would rather be free 
of that—freedom—but if I could catch sight of them without 
being seen...... Well, my little miss, what do you see, 
then, and what do you think I see? In the first place, the little 
cap you are wearing is very becoming and harmonizes com- 
pletely with the haste of your whole demeanor. It is neither a 
hat nor a bonnet, but a kind of hood. But you could not pos- 
sibly have had that on when you went out this morning. 
Could the servant have brought it, or did you borrow it from 
Aunt Jette? —Perhaps you are incognito. —But the veil should 
not be allowed to drop all the way down when you are going 
to look around. Or perhaps it is not a veil but only a wide piece 
of lace? It is impossible to tell in the dark. Whatever it is, it 
hides the upper part of your face. Your chin is rather lovely, a 
bit too pointed. Your mouth is small, open—that is because 
you are walking too fast. Your teeth, white as snow. So it 
should be. Teeth are extremely important; they are a body- 
guard concealed behind the seductive softness of the lips. Your 
cheeks are glowing with health. —If you tilt your head a little, 
it might be possible to penetrate up under this veil or this piece 
of lace. Be careful; such a glance from below is more danger- 
ous than one that is gerade aus [direct]! It is like fencing; and 
what weapon is as sharp, as penetrating, as gleaming in its 
movement and thereby as illusive as the eye? You feint a high 
quarte, as the fencer says, and then lunge instantaneously; the 
more swiftly the lunge can follow upon the feint, the better. It 
is an indescribable moment, the instant of the feint. The op- 
ponent feels, as it were, the cut; he is struck; and so he is, but 
in a place quite different from what he thought...... Un- 
daunted, she walks on, fearless and flawless. Watch out! There 


The Seducer’s Diary 319 


comes a man—drop your veil; do not let his profane glance de- 
file you. You have no notion of it; for a long time it perhaps 
would be impossible for you to forget the repulsive uneasiness 
with which it moved you—you do not notice, but I do, that he 
has surveyed the situation. The servant is marked out as the 
closest object. —Well, now you see the consequence of walk- 
ing alone with the servant. The servant has fallen down. 
Really, it is ludicrous, but what are you going to do now? To 
turn back and help him up on his feet is out of the question; to 
walk with a muddy servant is unpleasant; to walk alone is pre- 
carious. Watch out; the monster is approaching. ..... You 
do not answer me. *Just look at me—is my external appear- 
ance anything to be afraid of? I do not make the slightest 
impression on you; I seem to be a nice man from quite another 
world. There is nothing in what I say that disturbs you, noth- 
ing that reminds you of the situation, no movement that even 
remotely encroaches upon you. You are still a little apprehen- 
sive; you have not yet forgotten that unheimliche [disquieting] 
character’s approach toward you. You feel rather kindly dis- 
posed toward me; my shyness, which prevents me from look- 
ing at you, gives you the upper hand. It delights you and 
makes you safe; you could almost be tempted to make sport of 
mea little. I wager that right now you would have the courage 
to take my arm if it occurred to you...... So you live on 
Stormgade. You curtsey to me coldly and casually. Do I de- 
serve this, I who helped you out of all that unpleasantness? 
You have a change of mind, you turn back, thank me for my 
kindness, offer me your hand—why are you turning pale? Is 
not my voice the same as before, my attitude the same, my 
eyes just as calm and quiet? This handclasp? Can a handclasp 
mean anything? Indeed, much, very much, my little miss. 
Within a fortnight, I shall explain it all to you; until then you 
will remain in the contradiction: | am a nice man who came 
like a knight to the assistance of a young girl, and I can also 
press your hand in no less than a gentle manner.*! 


April 7 
32"Monday, then, one o’clock, at the exhibition.”” Very 
good, I shall have the honor of turning up at a quarter to one. 


292 


320 Eitther/Or, I 


A little rendezvous. On Saturday, I finally cut the matter short 
and decided to pay a visit to my much-traveled friend Adolph 
Bruun. With that in mind, about seven o’clock in the evening 
I started out on Vestergade, where someone told me he was 
supposed to live. But he was not to be found, not even on the 
fourth floor, where I arrived all out of breath. As I was about 
to go down the stairs, my ears picked up a melodious female 
voice saying in an undertone, ‘“‘Monday, then, one o’clock, at 
the exhibition; at that time the others are out, but you know 
that I never dare to see you at home.” The invitation was not 
meant for me but for a young man who—one, two, three— 
was out of the door so fast that my eyes, let alone my feet, 
could not catch up with him. Why do they not have a gaslight 
in stairways; then I might have been able to see whether it was 
worth the trouble to be so punctual. But if there had been a 
light, I perhaps would not have managed to hear anything. 
The established order is still the rational,*&gt; and Iam and remain 
an optimist...... Now who is it? The exhibition, to use 
Donna Anna’s expression, swarms with girls.** It is precisely 
a quarter to one. My beautiful stranger! Would that your in- 
tended might be as punctual in every way as I am, or do you 
wish instead that he may never arrive fifteen minutes early? As 
you wish—I am at your service in every way...... “En- 
chanting troll woman, fairy, or witch, dispel your fog,” show 
yourself. You are probably here already but invisible to me; 
make yourself known, for otherwise I certainly do not dare to 
expect a revelation. Are there perhaps several up here on the 
same errand as she? Very possibly. Who knows the ways of an 
individual, even when he is attending an exhibition? —There 
comes a young girl through the foyer, hurrying faster than a 
bad conscience after a sinner. She forgets to hand over her 
ticket; the man in a red uniform stops her. Good heavens, what 
a rush she is in. It must be she. Why such premature vehe- 
mence? It is not one o’clock yet. Do remember that you are sup- 
posed to meet your beloved. Does it make any difference how 
one looks on such an occasion, or is this an occasion when one 
must put one’s best foot forward, as they say? When such an 
innocent young thing is keeping an appointment, she goes at 
it in a frenzy. She is as nervous as can be. I, however, sit here 


The Seducer’s Diary 321 


most comfortably in my chair and contemplate a lovely rural 
landscape...... She is a very daughter of the devil; she 
storms through all the rooms. You must still try to hide your 
eagerness a bit; remember what was said to Miss Elizabeth: Is 
it seemly for a young girl to be so eager to become involved 
with someone?*&gt; But your involvement, of course, is one of 
the innocent ones. 

A rendezvous is usually regarded by lovers as the most 
beautiful moment. I myself still recall as clearly as if it were 
yesterday the first time I hurried to the appointed place with a 
heart as full as it was unacquainted with the joy awaiting me. 
The first time I knocked three times; the first time a window 
was opened; the first time a little wicker gate was opened by 
the invisible hand of a girl who concealed herself by opening 
it; the first time I hid a girl under my cape in the luminous 
summer night. But in this opinion there is a considerable ad- 
mixture of illusion. A neutral third party does not always find 
the lovers to be most beautiful at this moment. I have wit- 
nessed trysts in which, although the girl was lovely and the 
man handsome, the total impression was almost revolting and 
the meeting itself far from beautiful, although it undoubtedly 
seemed so to the lovers. In a way, one gains in becoming more 
experienced, for admittedly one loses the sweet disquietude of 
impatient longing but gains the poise to make the moment 
really beautiful. It annoys me to see a male become so confused 
on such an occasion that out of sheer love he has delirium tre- 
mens. What, indeed, do peasants know about cucumber salad! 
Instead of having the composure to enjoy her disquietude, to 
let it inflame her beauty and make it incandescent, he brings 
about only an ungainly confusion, and yet he goes home 
happy, imagining that it was something glorious. 

—But where the devil is the man? It is now almost two 
o’clock. Well, they are a splendid tribe, these lovers! What a 
scoundrel—to let a young miss wait for him! No, but of course 
I am a much more dependable person! It is probably best to 
speak to her now as she passes me for the fifth time. “Forgive 
my boldness, lovely lady; you are presumably looking for 
your family here. You have hurried by me several times, and 
as my eyes followed you I noticed that you always stop in the 


293 


294 


322 Either/Or, I 


next to the last room. Perhaps you do not know that there is 
still another room beyond that. There you will possibly find 
the ones you are looking for.’’ She curtseys to me; it is very 
becoming to her. The opportunity is propitious. Iam glad that 
the man is not coming—the fishing is always best in troubled 
waters. When a young miss is agitated, one can successfully 
risk much that otherwise would miscarry. 

I have bowed to her as politely and formally as possible; Iam 
once again sitting on my chair looking at my landscape and 
keeping my eye on her. To follow her immediately would be 
risking too much; it might seem as if I were obtrusive, and 
then she would be on her guard at once. Now she is of the 
opinion that I spoke to her out of sympathy, and I am in her 
good favor. —I know for sure that there is not a soul in the last 
room. Solitude will have a favorable effect upon her; as long 
as she sees many people around her, she is uneasy; if she is 
alone, she no doubt will subside. Quite right—she is staying 
in there. In a while, I will en passant [casually] come in; I have 
the right to say one line more—after all, she does owe me as 
much as a greeting. 

She has sat down. Poor girl, she looks so sad; she has been 
crying, I think, or at least she has had tears in her eyes. It is 
shocking—to force such a girl to tears. But be calm, you shall 
be avenged; I will avenge you; he will find out what it is to 
wait. —How beautiful she is now that the various squalls have 
calmed down and she is at rest in one mood. Her bearing is a 
harmonious blend of sadness and pain. She is really attractive. 
She sits there in her traveling clothes, and yet it was not she 
who was going to travel; she put them on to go out looking 
for joy, and now they are a symbol of her pain, for she is like 
one from whom joy is traveling away. She looks as if she had 
taken leave of her beloved forever. Let him go! —The situation 
is propitious; the moment beckons. The thing to do now is to 
express myself in such a way that it will appear as if I were of 
the opinion that she was looking for her family or a party of 
friends up here, and yet so warmly that every word is sugges- 
tive to her feelings, so I will have the opportunity to insinuate 
myself into her thoughts. 


The Seducer’s Diary 323 


Damn the scoundrel—there a fellow comes full speed into 
the room; no doubt it is he. Oh, no, what a clumsy fool, now 
when I have just got the situation the way I wanted it. Oh, 
well, I shall probably be able to turn this to advantage. I must 
come into casual contact with them, manage to be brought 
into the situation. When she sees me, she will involuntarily 
smile at me, who thought she was looking for her family out 
here, whereas she was looking for something entirely differ- 
ent. This smile will make me her confidant, which is always 
something. —A thousand thanks, my child; that smile is 
worth much more to me than you think; it is the beginning, 
and the beginning is always the hardest. Now we are acquaint- 
ances; our acquaintance is established in a piquant situation— 
for the time being it is enough for me. You no doubt will stay 
here scarcely more than an hour; in two hours I will know who 
you are—why else do you think the police keep census rec- 
ords? 


The ninth 

Have I become blind? Has the inner eye of the soul lost its 
power? I have seen her, but it is as if 1 had seen a heavenly rev- 
elation—so completely has her image vanished again for me. 
In vain do I summon all the powers of my soul in order to con- 
jure up this image. IfI ever see her again, I shall be able to rec- 
ognize her instantly, even though she stands among a hundred 
others. Now she has fled, and the eye of my soul tries in vain 
to overtake her with its longing. —I was walking along Lange- 
linie,*° seemingly nonchalantly and without paying attention 
to my surroundings, although my reconnoitering glance left 
nothing unobserved—and then my eyes fell upon her. My 
eyes fixed unswervingly upon her. They no longer obeyed 
their master’s will; it was impossible for me to shift my gaze 
and thus overlook the object I wanted to see—I did not look, I 
stared. As a fencer freezes in his lunge, so my eyes were fixed, 
petrified in the direction initially taken. It was impossible to 
look down, impossible to withdraw my glance, impossible to 
see, because I saw far too much. The only thing I have retained 
is that she had on a green cloak, that is all—one could call it 


295 


296 


324 Either/Or, I 


capturing the cloud instead of Juno;&gt;’ she has escaped me, like 
Joseph from Potiphar’s wife,** and left only her cloak behind. 
She was accompanied by an elderly woman, who appeared to 
be her mother. Her I can describe from top to toe, even though 
I did not really look at her at all but at most included her en 
passant. So it goes. The girl made an impression on me, and I 
forgot her; the other made no impression, and her I can re- 
member. 


The eleventh 
My soul is still caught in the same contradiction. I know that 
I have seen her, but I also know that I have forgotten it again, 
yet in such a way that the remnant of the recollection that is left 
does not refresh me. With a restlessness and vehemence, my 
soul, as if my welfare were at stake, demands this image, and 
yet it does not appear; I could tear out my eyes to punish them 
for their forgetfulness. Then, when I have chafed in impa- 
tience and have calmed down, it is as if presentiment and rec- 
ollection were weaving an image that still cannot take definite 
shape for me, because I cannot make it stand still in context; it 
is like a pattern in a fine weaving—the pattern is lighter than 
the background, and by itself it cannot be seen because it is too 
light. —This is a strange state to be in, and yet it has its pleas- 
ure intrinsically and also because it assures me that I am still 
young. This I also am able to learn from another observa- 
tion—namely, that I continually seek my prey among young 
girls, not among young women. A woman is less natural, 
more coquettish; a relationship with her is not beautiful, not 
interesting; it is piquant, and the piquant is always the last. — 
I had not expected to be able to taste once again the first fruits 
of falling in love. I have gone under in love-rapture; I have 
been given what swimmers call a ducking. No wonder that I 
am a little dazed. So much the better, so much the more do I 
promise myself out of this relationship. 


The fourteenth 
I scarcely know myself. My mind roars like a turbulent sea 
in the storms of passion. If someone else could see my soul in 


The Seducer’s Diary 325 


this state, it would seem to him that it, like a skiff, plunged 
prow-first down into the ocean, as if in its dreadful momen- 
tum it would have to steer down into the depths of the abyss. 
He does not see that high on the masta sailor is on the lookout. 
Roar away, you wild forces, roar away, you powers of pas- 
sion; even if your waves hurl foam toward the clouds, you still 
are not able to pile yourselves up over my head—I am sitting 
as calmly as the king of the mountain.*? 


Iam almost unable to find a foothold; like a water bird, lam 
seeking in vain to alight on the turbulent sea omy mind. And 
yet such turbulence is my element. I build upon it as the Alcedo 
ispida builds its nest upon the sea.” 


Turkey cocks ruffle their feathers when they see red. So it 
goes with me when I see green, every time I see a green cloak, 
and since my eyes often deceive me, all my expectations some- 
times run aground on a porter from Frederik’s Hospital. 


The twentieth 

One must limit oneself—that is the primary condition for all 
enjoyment. It does not seem that I shall soon find out anything 
about the girl who so fills my soul and my mind that the lack 
is amplified. Now I am going to stay quite calm, for this state, 
this obscure and indefinite but nevertheless powerful emotion, 
also has its sweetness. I have always liked to lie in a boat on a 
clear moonlit night out on one of our beautiful lakes. I haul in 
the sails, take in the oars, unship the rudder, lie down full 
length, and gaze up at the vault of heaven. When the waves 
rock the boat on their breast, when the clouds swiftly drift be- 
fore the wind, making the moon disappear for a moment and 
then reappear, I find rest in this restlessness. The motion of the 
waves lulls me; their slapping against the boat is a monotonous 
lullaby; the clouds’ hasty flight and the variation in lights and 
shadows intoxicates me so that I dream wide awake. | lie the 
same way now, haul in the sails, unship the rudder. Longing 
and impatient expectancy toss me in their arms; longing and 
expectancy become quieter and quieter, more and more bliss- 
ful: they coddle me like a child. Over me arches the heaven of 


297 


298 


326 Either/Or, I 


hope; her image drifts past me like the moon’s, indistinct, now 
blinding me with its light, now with its shadow. How enjoy- 
able to ripple along on moving water this way—how enjoya- 
ble to be in motion within oneself.* 


The twenty-first 
The days go by; I am still making no headway. The young 
misses delight me more than ever, and yet I have no desire to 
enjoy. I look for her everywhere. Often it makes me unrea- 
sonable, befuddles my vision, enervates my enjoyment. 
“That beautiful season will soon be here when one can buy up 
in the public streets and lanes the small claims that cost dearly 
enough during the social life in the winter season, for a young 
girl can forget much, but not a situation. It is true that social 
life does put a person in touch with the fair sex, but it is no 
good for beginning an affair. In social life, every girl is armed; 
the situation is unsatisfactory and occurs again and again—she 
receives no sensuous jolt. In the street, she is on the open sea, 
and therefore everything affects her more, and likewise every- 
thing is more enigmatic. I would give a hundred rix-dollars 
for a smile from a young girl in a street situation, and not ten 
for a hand squeeze at a party—that is an entirely different kind 
of currency. When the affair has started, one looks for the per- 
son concerned at parties. One has a secret communication 
with her that is tempting; it is the most energetic stimulation I 
know. She does not dare to talk about it, and yet she thinks 
about it; she does not know whether one has forgotten it or 
not; now one misleads her in this way, now in another. This 
year my ingathering has been small; this girl preoccupies me 
too much. Ina certain sense, my profits are meager, but then I 
do indeed have the prospect of the grand prize. 


The fifth 

Cursed chance! Never have I cursed you because you made 
your appearance; I curse you because you do not make your 
appearance at all. Or is this perhaps supposed to be a new in- 
vention of yours, you incomprehensible being, barren mother 
of everything, the only remnant remaining from “that time 


The Seducer’s Diary 327 


when necessity gave birth to freedom, when freedom let itself 
be tricked back into the womb again? Cursed chance! You, my 
only confidant, the only being I deem worthy to be my ally 
and my enemy, always similar to yourself in dissimilarity; al- 
ways incomprehensible, always an enigma! You whom I love 
with all the sympathy of my soul, in whose image I form my- 
self, why do you not make your appearance? I do not beg, I do 
not humbly plead that you will make your appearance in this 
manner or that; such worship would indeed be idolatry, 
would not be pleasing to you. I challenge you to a fight—why 
do you not make your appearance? Or has the balance wheel 
in the world structure stopped, is your enigma solved, and so 
you, too, have plunged into the sea of eternity? Terrible 
thought—then the world will come to a halt out of boredom! 
Cursed chance, I am waiting for you! I do not want to van- 
quish you by means of principles or what foolish people call 
character—no, I shall be your poet! I do not want to be a poet 
for others; make your appearance, and I shall be your poet. I 
shall eat my own poem, and that will be my food. Or do you 
find me unworthy? Just as a temple dancer dances to the honor 
of the god [Guden], so I have consecrated myself to your serv- 
ice; light, thinly clad, limber, unarmed, I renounce every- 
thing. | own nothing; I desire to own nothing; I love nothing; 
I have nothing to lose—but have I not thereby become more 
worthy of you, you who long ago must have been tired of de- 
priving people of what they love, tired of their craven snivel- 
ing and craven pleading. Surprise me—I am ready. No 
stakes—let us fight for honor. Show her to me, show me a 
possibility that seems to be an impossibility; show her to me 
among the shades of the underworld, and I shall bring her 
back.*5 Let her hate me, scorn me, be indifferent to me, love 
someone else—I do not fear; but stir up the water,** break the 
silence. To starve me this way is mean of you, you who never- 
theless fancy yourself stronger than I. 


May 6 
Spring is here. Everything is burgeoning, the young girls 
also. Their cloaks are laid aside; presumably my green one, 


I 
299 


300 


328 Either/Or, I 


too, has been hung up. This is the result of making a girl’s ac- 
quaintance in the street, not in society, where one is immedi- 
ately told her name, her family, where she lives, whether she 
is engaged. The last is extremely important information for all 
sober and steady suitors, to whom it would never occur to fall 
in love with an engaged girl. Such an ambler would then be in 
mortal distress if he were in my place; he would be utterly 
demolished if his efforts to obtain information were crowned 
with success and with the bonus that she was engaged. This, 
however, does not bother me very much. An engagement is 
nothing but a comic predicament. I fear neither comic nor 
tragic predicaments; the only ones I fear are the langweilige 
(boring] ones. So far, I have not come up with a single bit of 
information, although I certainly have left nothing untried and 
many times have felt the truth of the poet’s words: 


Nox et hiems longaeque viae, saevique dolores 
Mollibus his castris, et labor omnis inest 
[Night, storm, long journeys, cruel pains 
All kinds of pains are in this dainty camp].*” 


Perhaps she does not live here in the city at all; perhaps she is 
from the country, perhaps, perhaps—I can fly into a rage over 
all these perhapses, and the angrier I become, the more the per- 
hapses. I always have money at hand in order to be able to set 
out upon a journey. In vain do I look for her at the theater, at 
concerts, at dances, on the promenades. Ina certain sense, lam 
pleased; a young girl who participates in such amusements a 
great deal is usually not worth conquering; she most often 
lacks the originality that for me is and remains the conditio sine 
qua non [indispensable condition]. It is not as incomprehensible 
to find a Preciosa*® among the gypsies as in the market places 
where young girls are offered for sale—in all innocence—good 
heavens, who says otherwise! 


The twelfth 

“Now, my child, why do you not remain standing quite 
calmly in the doorway? There is absolutely nothing against a 
young girl’s entering a doorway during a shower. I do it my- 


The Seducer’s Diary 329 


self when I have no umbrella, sometimes even when I have 
one, as now, for example. Moreover, I could mention several 
estimable ladies who have not hesitated to do it. Just be calm, 
turn your back to the street; then the passersby cannot even tell 
whether you are just standing there or are about to enter the 
building. But it is indiscreet to hide behind the door when it is 
standing half open, chiefly because of the consequences, for 
the more you are concealed, the more unpleasant it is to be sur- 
prised. But if you have concealed yourself, then stand very 
still, commending yourself to your good guardian spirit and 
the care of all the angels; especially avoid peeking out to see 
whether the rain is over. If you really want to be sure of it, take 
a firm step forward and look up gravely at the sky. But if you 
stick your head out somewhat inquisitively, self-consciously, 
anxiously, uncertainly, quickly draw it back—then any child 
understands this movement; it is called playing hide-and-seek. 
And I, who always join in games, should I hold back, should I 
not answer when asked? ..... Do not think I am harboring 
any disrespectful thoughts about you; you did not have the 
slightest ulterior motive in sticking your head out—it was the 
most innocent thing in the world. In return, you must not af- 
front me in your thoughts; my good name and reputation will 
not tolerate it. Moreover, it was you who started this. I advise 
you never to speak to anyone about this incident; you are in the 
wrong. What do I propose to do other than what any gentle- 
man would do—offer you my umbrella. —Where did she go? 
Splendid! She has hidden herself down in the porter’s door- 
way. What a darling little girl, cheerful, contented. —‘‘Per- 
haps you could tell me about a young lady who this very mo- 
ment stuck her head out of this door, obviously in need of an 
umbrella. She is the one I am looking for, land my umbrella.” 
—You laugh. —Perhaps you will allow me to send my servant 
to fetch it tomorrow, or do you recommend that I call a car- 
riage? —Nothing to thank me for; it is only common cour- 
tesy. —That is one of the most delightful girls I have seen in a 
long time; her glance is so childlike and yet so saucy, her man- 
ner so lovely, so chaste, and yet she is inquisitive. —Go in 
peace, my child. If it were not for a green cloak, I might have 


I 
301 


302 


330 Either/Or, I 


wished to establish a closer acquaintance. —She walks down 
along Store Kjobmagergade. How innocent and full of confi- 
dence, not a trace of prudery. See how lightly she walks, how 
pertly she tosses her head—the green cloak requires self-de- 
nial. 


The fifteenth 

Thank you, kind chance; accept my thanks! Erect was she 
and proud, mysterious and abounding in thought like a spruce 
tree, one shoot, one thought, which deep from the interior of 
the earth shoots up toward heaven, unexplained, unexplain- 
able to itself, a unity that has no parts. The beech tree puts on a 
crown; its leaves tell what has occurred beneath it. The spruce 
has no crown, no history, is a riddle to itself—she was like 
that. °°She herself was hidden in herself; she herself rose up out 
of herself; there was a recumbent pride in her like the spruce’s 
bold escape—although it is riveted to the earth. A sadness sur- 
rounded her, like the cooing of the wood dove, a deep longing 
that was lacking nothing. She was an enigma that enigmati- 
cally possessed its own solution, a secret, &gt;!and what are all the 
secrets of the diplomats compared with this, a riddle, and what 
in all the world is as beautiful as the word that solves it? How 
suggestive, how pregnant, the language is: to solve [at lose]— 
what ambiguity there is in it, with what beauty and with what 
strength it pervades all the combinations in which this word 
appears! Just as the soul’s wealth is a riddle as long as the cord 
of the tongue is not loosened [lest] and thereby the riddle is 
solved [last], so also a young girl is a riddle. 

Thank you, kind chance; accept my thanks! If I had been 
able to see her in the wintertime, she no doubt would have 
been wrapped in the green cloak, benumbed with cold per- 
haps, and the harshness of nature would have diminished her 
beauty. But now—what luck! I saw her the first time at the 
most beautiful time of the year, in the early part of summer in 
the afternoon light. Of course, winter also has its advantages. 
A brilliantly lighted ballroom may very well be a flattering set- 
ting for a girl dressed for a dance. But for one thing she seldom 
shows up to her best advantage here precisely because every- 


The Seducer’s Diary 331 


thing requires her to do so—a requirement that has a disturb- 
ing effect on her whether she complies with it or does just the 
opposite. For another, everything is reminiscent of transitori- 
ness and vanity and evokes an impatience that makes the en- 
joyment less refreshing. There are certain times when I admit- 
tedly would not want to be deprived of a ballroom, deprived 
of its expensive luxury, its priceless overabundance of youth 
and beauty, its multiple play of powers, but I do not enjoy it 
as much as I revel in possibility. It is not a particular beauty 
who captivates me, but a totality; a visionary picture floats 
past me in which all these feminine beings blend with one an- 
other and all these movements are seeking something, seeking 
repose in a picture that is not seen. 

It was on the footpath between Nerreport and Osterport.*? 
It was about half past six. The sun had lost its vigor; only a rec- 
ollection of it was preserved in a soft glimmering that spread 
over the landscape. Nature breathed more freely. The lake was 
still, smooth as a mirror. The pleasant, friendly buildings of 
Blegdam*™ were reflected on the water, which further out was 
as dark as metal. The path and the buildings on the other side 
were illuminated by the faint rays of the sun. The sky was clear 
and open; only a single light cloud glided hazily across it, best 
observed when one stared fixedly at the lake, over whose 
smooth brow it disappeared. Not a leaf was stirring. —It was 
she. My eyes had not deceived me, even though the green 
cloak had done so. Although I had been prepared for this for a 
long time, it was impossible for me to control a certain rest- 
lessness, a rising and falling like that of the lark as it rises and 
falls in its song over the nearby fields. 

She was alone. Once again I have forgotten what she was 
wearing, and yet I do have an image of her now. She was 
alone, preoccupied, obviously not with herself but with her 
own thoughts. She was not thinking, but the quiet revolving 
of her thoughts wove an image of longing for her soul that had 
a presentiment as unexplainable as a young girl’s many sighs. 
She was in her most beautiful age. A young girl does not de- 
velop in the sense that a boy does; she does not grow, she is 
born. A boy begins to develop immediately and takes a long 


I 
303 


304 


332 Either/Or, I 


time to do it; a young girl takes a long time to be born and is 
born full-grown. In this lies her infinite richness; the moment 
she is born, she is full-grown, but this moment of birth 
comes late. Therefore she is born twice: the second time 
when she marries or, more correctly, at that moment she stops 
being born—only at that moment is she born. It is not only 
Minerva*’ who springs full-grown out of Jupiter’s forehead, it 
is not only Venus*® who rises up out of the sea in her full 
beauty—every young girl is like this if her femininity has not 
been spoiled by what is called developing. She does not 
awaken gradually, but at once; on the other hand, she dreams 
that much longer, that is, if people are not so unreasonable as 
to awaken her too soon. But this dreaming is an infinite rich- 
ness. 

She was preoccupied not with herself but within herself, and 
this preoccupation was a boundless peace and repose within 
herself. In this way a young girl is rich; to embrace this rich- 
ness makes oneself rich. She is rich, although she does not re- 
alize that she possesses anything; she is rich—she is a treasure. 
A quiet peacefulness rested upon her, and a trace of sadness.&gt;? 
She was light to lift with the eyes, as light as Psyche, who 
was carried away by the jinn, even lighter, for she carried her- 
self. Let the teachers of the Church argue about the assump- 
tion of the Madonna; it does not seem incomprehensible to 
me, for she no longer belonged to the world, but the lightness 
of a young girl is incomprehensible and mocks the law of 
gravity. 

She did not notice anything and for that reason believed that 
she was not noticed either. I remained at a distance and im- 
bibed her image. She was walking slowly; no sense of haste 
marred her peace or the tranquillity of the surroundings. A 
boy sat by the lake and fished; she stood still and watched the 
mirror of the water and the little float. Although she had not 
been walking fast, she nevertheless wanted to cool off. She 
loosened a little scarf tied around her neck under her shaw]; a 
gentle breeze from the lake fanned a bosom as white as snow, 
yet warm and full. The boy did not seem pleased to have a wit- 
ness to his fishing; he turned and observed her with a rather 


The Seducer’s Diary 333 


apathetic look. He really looked ludicrous, and I do not blame 
her for laughing at him. How youthfully she laughed; if she 
had been alone with the boy, I believe she would not have been 
afraid to scrap with him. Her eyes were large and glowing; 
when one looked into them, they had a dark luster, intimating 
an infinite depth, since it was impossible to penetrate into 
them; pure and innocent they were, gentle and calm, full of ro- 
guishness when she smiled. Her nose was delicately arched; 
when I saw her from the side, it seemed to draw back into her 
forehead and thereby became a bit shorter and a bit more 
saucy. 

She walked on; I followed. Fortunately there were several 
strollers on the path. Exchanging a few words with one person 
and another, I let her get ahead a little and soon caught up with 
her again and in that way saved myself the need of having to 
walk at a distance just as slowly as she did. She walked in the 
direction of Osterport. I wished to see her closer at hand with- 
out being seen. On the corner there was a house from which I 
might be able to do that. I knew the family and thus needed 
only to pay them a visit. With a quickened pace, I hurried past 
her as if I did not notice her in the remotest way. Having gone 
far ahead of her, I greeted the family all around and then took 
possession of the window that looked out on the footpath. She 
came walking along; I looked and looked, while at the same 
time I spun out chitchat with the tea company in the living 
room. The way she walked quickly convinced me that she had 
not had much training in dance, and yet there was a pride in it, 
a natural nobility, but an absence of self-consciousness. I man- 
aged to see her one more time than I had actually counted on. 
From the window, I could not see far down the path, but I 
could see a dock that ran out into the lake, and to my great 
amazement I spied her again out there. It occurred to me that 
perhaps she lived out here in the country; perhaps her family 
had taken rooms for the summer. 

I was already beginning to regret my visit, fearing that she 
would turn around and I would lose sight of her, indeed, that 
her appearance at the far end of the dock was a sign that she 
was vanishing from my sight—and then she appeared nearby. 


305 


334 Either/Or, I 


She was walking past the house; I hastily grabbed my hat and 
my cane with the intention of passing by her and dropping be- 
hind her again many times until I discovered where she lived— 
when in my haste I jolted a woman’s arm just as she was offer- 
ing tea. There was a frightful shriek; I stood there with hat and 
cane, wanting only to be off and if possible to give the incident 
a turn and motivate my retreat. I cried out with pathos: I shall 
be exiled like Cain from this place that saw this tea spilled! But 
just as if everything had conspired against me, my host had the 
dismaying idea of following up my comment and declared 
loudly and solemnly that I would not be allowed to go before 
I had enjoyed a cup of tea and had made restitution for the 
spilled tea by serving the ladies myself. Since I was convinced 
that in the present situation my host would regard it as a cour- 
tesy to use force, there was nothing to do but remain. —She 
had disappeared. 


The sixteenth 

How beautiful it is to be in love; how interesting it is to 
know that one is in love. This, you see, is the difference. I can 
become furious at the thought that she disappeared before me 
the second time, and yet in a certain sense I am glad of it. The 
image I have of her hovers indefinitely somewhere between 
her actual and her ideal form. I now have this image before me, 
but precisely because either it is actuality or actuality is indeed 
the occasion, it has a singular magic. I feel no impatience, for 
she must live here in the city, and at this moment that is 
enough for me. This possibility is the condition for the proper 
appearance of her image—everything will be enjoyed in slow 
drafts. And should I not be calm—I, who can regard myself as 
a favorite of the gods, I, whose lot was the rare good fortune 
of falling in love again. This is something that cannot be elic- 
ited by skill or study—it is a gift. But if I have succeeded in 
stirring up an erotic love again, I do want to see how long it 
can be sustained. I coddle this love as I never did my first. The 
opportunity falls to one’s lot rarely enough—therefore the 
point is truly to utilize it if it does come along, for it is dismay- 
ing that it is no art to seduce a girl but it is a stroke of good 


The Seducer’s Diary 335 


fortune to find one who is worth seducing. —Love is full of 
mysteries, and this first falling in love is also a mystery, even 
though a minor one. Most people rush ahead, become en- 
gaged or do other stupid things, and in a turn of the hand 
everything is over, and they know neither what they have won 
nor what they have lost. Two times she has appeared before 
me and has disappeared; that means she will appear more 
often. When Joseph had interpreted Pharaoh’s dream, he 
added: But the fact that you dreamed twice means that it will 
be fulfilled soon.*! 


Yet it would be interesting if one could discern somewhat 
ahead of time the forces whose emergence forms the content 
of life. At present she is living in all her tranquil peace; she does 
not have even an inkling of my existence, even less of what is 
going on within me, to say nothing of the assurance with 
which I gaze into her future, for my soul is demanding more 
and more actuality, and it is becoming stronger and stronger. 
If at first sight a girl does not make such a deep impression on 
a person that she awakens the ideal, then ordinarily the actual- 
ity is not especially desirable; but if she does, then no matter 
how experienced a person is he usually is rather overwhelmed. 
Lalways advise the person who is not sure of his hand, his eye, 
and his victory to venture the attack in this first state, in which, 
precisely because he is overwhelmed, he has supranatural 
powers—for being overwhelmed is a curious mixture of sym- 
pathy and egotism. He will, however, miss out on an enjoy- 
ment, for he does not enjoy the situation since he himself is 
wrapped up in it, hidden in it. Which is the more beautiful is 
difficult to decide—which is the more interesting is easy. It is, 
however, always best to come as close as possible to the line. 
This is the real enjoyment, and what others enjoy I do not 
know for sure. Mere possession is very little, and the means 
such lovers use are usually paltry enough; they do not even re- 
ject money, power, alien influence, sleeping potions, etc. But 
what pleasure is there in love if absolute abandon is not intrin- 
sic to it, that is, from the one side—but ordinarily that takes 
spirit, and such lovers generally do not have that. 


306 


336 Either/Or, I 


The nineteenth 
Cordelia, then, is her name! Cordelia! It is a beautiful name, 
and that, too, is important, since it can often be very disturb- 
ing to have to name an ugly name together with the most 
tender adjectives. I already recognized her a long way off; she 
was walking with two other girls on her left. The movement 
of their walking seemed to indicate that they were about to 
stop. I stood on the corner and read the posters, while I contin- 
ually kept my eye on my strangers. They parted. The two pre- 
sumably had gone a little out of their way, for they went in a 
different direction. She came along toward my corner. When 
she had walked a few steps, one of the young girls came run- 
ning after her and cried loudly enough for me to hear it: Cor- — 
delia! Cordelia! Then the third one joined them; they put their 
heads together for a privy council meeting whose secrets I fu- 
tilely strained my ears to hear. Thereupon they all three 
laughed and hurried away at a somewhat quicker pace in the 
direction the two had taken. I followed them. They entered a 
house on Stranden.® I waited for a while, since there was a 
strong probability that Cordelia would soon come back alone. 
But that did not happen. 


Cordelia! That is really a splendid name—indeed, the same 
name as that of King Lear’s third daughter, that remarkable 
girl whose heart did not dwell on her lips, whose lips were 
mute when her heart was full. So also with my Cordelia. She 
resembles her, of that I am certain. But in another sense her 
heart does dwell on her lips, not in the form of words but in a 
more heartfelt way in the form of a kiss. How ripe with health 
her lips! I have never seen lips more beautiful. 

That I actually am in love I can tell partly by the secrecy with 
which I treat this matter, almost even with myself. All love is 
secretive, even the faithless kind, if it has the appropriate es- 
thetic element within it. It has never occurred to me to wish 
for confidants or to boast of my adventures. Thus it almost 
makes me happy that I did not come to know where she lives 
but the place where she frequently visits. Perhaps I thereby 
may also have come even closer to my goal. I can make my 
observations without arousing her attention, and from this 


The Seducer’s Diary 337 


firmly established point it will not be difficult for me to gain 
admission into her family. But should this situation turn out 
to be a difficulty—eh bien [well, now]!—then I will put up with 
the difficulty alone. Everything I do I do con amore [with love], 
and so I also love con amore. 


The twentieth 

Today I learned something about the house into which she 
disappeared. It belongs to a widow with three lovely daugh- 
ters. Information in abundance is to be had there—that is, pro- 
vided they have any. The only difficulty is to understand these 
details raised to the third power, for they all three speak at 
once. Her name is Cordelia Wahl, and she is the daughter of an 
officer in the Royal Navy. He has been dead for some years— 
the mother, too. He was a very severe and strict man.® She 
now lives with her aunt, her father’s sister, who is supposed to 
be like her brother but otherwise is a very respectable woman. 
Now that is all very fine, but in other respects they know 
nothing about this household; they never visit there, but Cor- 
delia visits them frequently. She and the two girls take a course 
in the royal kitchen. Therefore, she generally visits there early 
in the afternoon, sometimes in the morning, never in the eve- 
ning. They keep very much to themselves. 

So this is the end of the story; it is apparent that there is no 
bridge over which I can steal into Cordelia’s house. 

Consequently, she does have a conception of the pains in 
life, of its dark side. Who would have said this of her. Yet these 
recollections probably belong to an earlier period; this is a ho- 
rizon under which she has lived without really being aware of 
it. That is fine—it has saved her femininity; she is not warped. 
On the other hand, it will also have significance in elevating 
her, if one really knows how to call it forth. All such things 
usually teach pride, provided they do not break one, and she is 
far from being broken. 


The twenty-first 

She lives near the embankment; the locality is not the best, 
no neighbors whose acquaintance one could make, no public 
places where one can make observations unnoticed. The em- 


I 
308 


309 


338 Either/Or, I 


bankment itself is not very suitable; one is too visible. If one 
walks below on the street, one cannot very well walk on the 
side next to the embankment, because no one walks there, and 
it would be too conspicuous, or one would have to walk close 
to the houses, and then one can see nothing. It is a corner 
house. Since the house has no neighboring house, the win- 
dows to the courtyard are also visible from the street. Presum- 
ably her bedroom is there. 


The twenty-second 
Today I saw her for the first time at Mrs. Jansen’s. I was in- 
troduced to her. She did not seem to make anything of it or 
pay any attention to me. I kept myself as unobtrusive as pos- 
sible in order to observe her all the better. She stayed only a 
moment; she had come only to fetch the daughters, who were 
to go to the royal kitchen. While the two Jansen girls were put- 
ting on their coats, we two were alone in the room, and I, with 
a cold, almost supercilious apathy, said a few casual words to 
her, to which she replied with undeserved politeness. Then 
they went. I could have offered to accompany them, but that 
already would have sufficed to indicate the gallant suitor, and 
I have convinced myself that she is not to be won that way. — 
On the contrary, I chose to leave right after they had gone and 
to walk faster than they, but along other streets, yet likewise 
heading toward the royal kitchen so that when they turned 
onto Store Kongensgade I passed them in the greatest haste 
without greeting them or anything—to their great astonish- 
ment. 


The twenty-third 

It is necessary for me to gain entrance to the house, and for 
that, as they say in military language, I am prepared. It looks, 
however, as if that will be a fairly protracted and difficult mat- 
ter. I have never known any family that lived so much apart. 
It is only she and her aunt—no brothers, no cousins, not a 
thread to grab onto, no far-removed connection to contact. I 
walk around continually with one arm available. Not for any- 
thing in the world would I walk with someone on each arm at 


The Seducer’s Diary 339 


this time. My arm is a grappling hook that must always be 
kept in readiness; my arm is intended for the potential yield— 
if far off in the distance a very distant relative or friend should 
appear whom I from afar could catch hold of, then I make a 
grab. Moreover, it is not right for a family to live so isolated; 
the poor girl is being deprived of the opportunity to learn to 
know the world, to say nothing of the other possible danger- 
ous consequences it may have.® That always has its revenge. 
It is the same with proposing. To be sure, such isolation does 
protect one from petty thievery. In a very sociable house, op- 
portunity makes the thief. But that does not matter greatly, 
for there is not much to steal from such girls; when they are 
sixteen years old, their hearts are already a filled autograph al- 
bum, and I never care to write my name where many have al- 
ready written. It never occurs to me to scratch my name ona 
window pane or in a tavern, or on a tree or a bench in Freder- 
iksberg gardens.© 


The twenty-seventh 

The more I see of her, the more convinced I am that she is 
an isolated person. This a man ought never to be, not even a 
young man, because, since his development depends essen- 
tially upon reflection, he must have contact with others. 
Therefore, a young girl should not be interesting either, for 
the interesting always involves a reflecting on oneself, just as 
for the same reason the interesting in art always includes an 
impression of the artist. A young girl who wants to please by 
being interesting will, if anything, please herself. From the es- 
thetic side, this is the objection to all kinds of coquetry. It is 
quite different with what is inappropriately called coquetry, 
which is nature’s own gesture—for example, feminine mod- 
esty, which is always the most beautiful coquetry. An inter- 
esting girl may very well be successful in pleasing, but just as 
she herself has surrendered her womanliness, so also the men 
whom she pleases are usually just as unmasculine. Such a 
young girl first becomes interesting in her relation with men. 
The woman is the weaker sex, and yet it is much more impor- 
tant for her to stand alone in her youth than for the man; she 


310 


311 


340 Either/Or, I 


must be sufficient unto herself, but that by which and in which 
she is sufficient unto herself is an illusion; it is this dowry with 
which nature has endowed her like a king’s daughter. But it is 
precisely this resting in illusion that isolates her. 

I have often pondered why it is that there is nothing more 
corrupting for a young girl than associating a great deal with 
other young girls. Obviously the reason is that this association 
is neither one thing nor another; it unsettles the illusion but 
does not clarify it. The woman’s fundamental qualification is 
to be company for the man,’ but through association with her 
own sex she is led to reflection upon it, which makes her a so- 
ciety lady instead of company. The language itself is very 
suggestive in this respect; the man is called “‘master,”’ but the 
woman is not called ‘“‘maidservant” or anything like that—no, 
a definition of essence is used: she is company, not company- 
maid. If] were to imagine an ideal girl, she would always stand 
alone in the world and thereby be assigned to herself, but 
mainly she would not have friends among the girls. It is cer- 
tainly true that the Graces were three, but it certainly never oc- 
curred to anyone to think of them as talking together; in their 
silent trinity they form a beautiful feminine unity. In this re- 
spect, I could almost be tempted to recommend the virgins’ 
bower [Jomfrubuur]® again, if this constraint were not in turn 
damaging in its effects. It is always best that a young girl be 
allowed her freedom, but that the opportunity not be pro- 
vided. She thereby becomes beautiful and is rescued from be- 
coming interesting. To give a virgin’s veil or a bridal veil to a 
young girl who spends much time in the company of other 
girls is futile, but he who has sufficient esthetic sensitivity will 
always find that an innocent girl in the deeper and best sense of 
the word is brought to him veiled, even if it is not the custom 
to use a bridal veil. 

She has been brought up strictly; I honor her parents in their 
graves for that; she leads a very reserved life, and in thanks I 
could hug her aunt for that. She has not become acquainted 
with worldly delights, has not become jaded through indul- 
gence. She is proud; she spurns what delights other girls, and 
this is as it should be. It is a falseness that I shall know how to 


The Seducer’s Diary 341 


turn to my advantage. Frills and finery do not appeal to her as 
they do to other girls; she is somewhat polemic, but this is nec- 
essary for a girl with her romanticism. She lives in a world of 
fantasy. If she fell into the wrong hands, it might bring out 
something very unwomanly in her precisely because there is 
so much womanliness in her. 


The thirtieth 
Everywhere our paths cross. Today I met her three times. I 
know about her every little outing, when and where I shall 
come across her, but I do not use this knowledge to contrive 
an encounter with her—on the contrary, I am prodigal on a 
frightful scale. A meeting that often has cost me several hours 
of waiting is wasted as if it were a bagatelle. I do not approach 
her, I merely skirt the periphery of her existence. If] know that 
she is going to Mrs. Jansen’s, I prefer not to encounter her un- 
less it is important for me to make a particular observation. I 
prefer to come to Mrs. Jansen’s a little early and, if possible, to 
pass her at the door as she is coming and I am going, or on the 
steps, where [ nonchalantly pass by her. This is the first web 
into which she must be spun. On the street, I do not stop her, 
or I exchange a greeting with her but never come close, but al- 
ways Strive for distance. Presumably our repeated encounters 
are clearly noticeable to her; presumably she does perceive that 
on her horizon a new planet has loomed, which in its course 
has encroached disturbingly upon hers in a curiously undis- 
turbing way, but she has no inkling of the law underlying this 
movement. She is tempted instead to look around to the right 
and to the left to see whether she can discover the point that is 
the goal; she is just as unaware that it is she as her antipode is. 
Just as those around me are inclined to do, she believes that J 
have a host of business affairs; I am constantly on the go and 
say, like Figaro: One, two, three, four schemes at a time — 
that is my pleasure. Before I begin my attack, I must first be- 
come acquainted with her and her whole mental state. 
The majority enjoy a young girl as they enjoy a glass of 
champagne, at one effervescent moment—oh, yes, that is 
really beautiful, and with many a young girl that is undoubt- 


312 


313 


342 Either/Or, I 


edly the most one can attain, but here there is more. If an in- 
dividual is too fragile to stand clarity and transparency, well, 
then one enjoys what is unclear, but apparently she can stand 
it. The more devotedness one can bring to erotic love, the 
more interesting. This momentary enjoyment is a rape, even 
if not outwardly but nevertheless mentally, and in a rape there 
is only imagined enjoyment; it is like a stolen kiss, something 
nondescript. No, if one can bring it to a point where a girl has 
but one task for her freedom, to give herself, so that she feels 
her whole happiness in this, so that she practically begs for this 
devotedness and yet is free—only then is there enjoyment, but 
this always takes a discerning touch. 


Cordelia! It is indeed a glorious name! I sit at home and prac- 
tice saying it to myself like a parrot. I say: Cordelia, Cordelia, 
my Cordelia, you my Cordelia. I cannot help smiling at the 
thought of the plan according to which sometime at the crucial 
moment I shall pronounce these words. One should always 
make preparatory studies; everything must be properly ar- 
ranged. No wonder poets are always describing this dus-mo- 
ment,”° that most beautiful moment when the lovers, not by 
sprinkling (to be sure, there are many who go no further) but 
by immersion in the sea of love, strip themselves of the old 
man and rise up from this baptism and only then really rec- 
ognize each other as old acquaintances, although they are only 
one moment old. For a young girl, this is always the most 
beautiful moment, and to enjoy it properly one ought to be on 
a somewhat higher level—not just as someone being baptized 
but also as the priest. A little irony makes the moment follow- 
ing this moment one of the most interesting—it is a spiritual 
disrobing. One must be poetic enough not to interfere with 
the ceremony, and yet the rogue in oneself must always be on 
the watch. 


June 2 

She is proud—that I saw long ago. When she is together 
with the three Jansens, she speaks very little. Their chatter ob- 
viously bores her; a certain smile on her lips seems to indicate 


The Seducer’s Diary 343 


that. [ am building upon that smile. —At other times, to the 
amazement of the Jansens, she can abandon herself to an al- 
most boyish wildness. When I consider her life as a child, it is 
not unaccountable to me. She had only one brother, a year 
older than she. She knew only the father and brother, wit- 
nessed some earnest episodes that make ordinary silly chatter 
disgusting. Her father and mother did not live together hap- 
pily; that which generally more or less clearly or obscurely 
beckons to a young girl does not beckon to her. It might well 
be that she is puzzled about what a young girl is. Maybe at par- 
ticular moments she wishes that she were not a girl but a man. 


She has imagination, spirit, passion—in short, all the essen- 
tials, but not subjectively reflected. An incident today con- 
vinced me of this. I knew from the Jansen house that she does 
not play an instrument—it goes against her aunt’s principles. I 
have always regretted this, for music is always a good means 
of communication with a young girl if one, please note, is 
careful not to appear to be a connoisseur. Today I went over to 
Mrs. Jansen’s. I had partially opened the door without knock- 
ing, a rudeness that frequently works to my advantage and 
that I remedy, when necessary, by the foolishness of knocking 
on the open door. She was sitting there alone at the piano—she 
seemed to be playing furtively. It was a little Swedish melody. 
She did not play well; she became impatient, but then the 
strains came again, more softly. I shut the door and remained 
outside, listening to the change in her moods. At times there 
was a passion in her playing that reminded me of the maid 
Mettelil,”! who struck the golden harp so that milk spouted 
from her breasts. —There was something sad but also some- 
thing dithyrambic in her playing. —I could have rushed for- 
ward, seized this moment: that would have been foolish. — 
Recollection is a means not only of conserving but also of aug- 
menting; something that is permeated by recollection has a 
double effect. —Frequently in books, especially hymnbooks, 
one finds a little flower—the occasion for its being placed there 
was a beautiful moment; the recollection is even more beauti- 
ful. Obviously she conceals the fact that she plays, or perhaps 


314 


315 


344 Either/Or, I 


she plays only this little Swedish melody—does it perhaps 
have a special interest for her? I know nothing about this, but 
for that reason this event is of great importance to me. Some- 
time when I can speak more confidentially with her, I shall 
very covertly lead her to this point and let her fall down 
through this trapdoor. 


June 3 
Still I cannot make up my mind how to understand her; this 
is why I keep so quiet, so much in the background—indeed, 
like a soldier on vedette duty who throws himself on the 
ground and listens to the faintest reverberation of an advanc- 
ing enemy. I do not actually exist for her, not in the sense of a 
negative relationship but in the sense of no relationship at all. 
As yet I have risked no venture. —To see her was to love her, 
as the novels say—yes, that would be true enough if love did 
not have a dialectic, but what, indeed, does one come to know 
about love from novels? Sheer lies—which helps to shorten the 
task. 


According to everything I have now learned about her, 
when I think back on the impression that first meeting made 
on me, my conception of her is certainly modified, but to her 
advantage as well as to mine. It is not exactly the order of the 
day for a young girl to walk all alone this way, or for a young 
girl to sink into herself this way. She was tested according to 
my rigorous critique: lovely. But loveliness is a very volatile 
element that vanishes like yesterday when it is over.” Thad not 
thought of her in the setting in which she lives, least of all so 
unreflectively acquainted with the storms of life. 


But I would like to know the state of her feelings. Surely 
she has never been in love; her spirit is too free-ranging for 
that. Least of all is she one of those theoretically experienced 
maidens who, long in advance, are so facile in imagining 
themselves in the arms of a lover. The real-life people she has 
met have simply not been able to confuse her about the rela- 
tion between dream and actuality. Her soul is still nourished 
by the divine ambrosia of ideals. But the ideal hovering before 


The Seducer’s Diary 345 


her is certainly not a shepherdess or a heroine in a novel, a mis- 
tress, but a Joan of Arc or something like that. 


The question always remains whether her womanliness is 
sufficiently strong to reflect itself, or whether it will be en- 
joyed only as beauty and loveliness; the question is whether 
one dares to bend the bow to greater tension. It is in itself 
something great to find a purely immediate womanliness, but 
if one dares to risk altering it, one has the interesting. In that 
case, it is best to saddle her with a plain and simple suitor. That 
this would harm a young girl is a superstition people have. — 
Indeed, if she is a very choice and delicate plant who has only 
one crowning feature in her life—loveliness—then it is always 
best that she has never heard love mentioned. But if that is not 
the case, then it is an advantage, and I would never hesitate to 
produce a suitor if there was none. This suitor must not be a 
caricature either, for nothing is gained thereby; he must be a 
respectable young man, even charming if possible, but still in- 
adequate for her passion. She looks down on such a person; 
she acquires a distaste for love; she becomes almost diffident 
about her own reality [Realitet] when she senses her destiny 
and sees what actuality [ Virkelighed] offers. If to love, she says, 
is nothing else, then it does not amount to much. She becomes 
proud in her love. This pride makes her interesting; it illumi- 
nates her being with heightened color, but it also brings her 
closer to her downfall—but all this makes her ever more inter- 
esting. It is nevertheless best to make sure of her acquaintances 
first, in order to see if there might be such a suitor. There is no 
opportunity at home, for practically no one ever visits there, 
but she does go out, and probably such a person could be 
found there. It is always precarious to provide such a person 
before knowing this. Two suitors, each inconsequential in 
himself, could have a harmful effect because of their relativity. 
I shall now find out whether there is such a lover in secret who 
does not have the courage to storm the house, a chicken thief 
who sees no chance in such a cloister-like house. 

Consequently, the strategic principle, the law for every 
move in this campaign, is always to have tangential contact 


316 


317 


346 Either/Or, I 


with her in an interesting situation. Consequently, the inter- 
esting is the territory in which the struggle is to be carried on; 
the potency of the interesting must be exhausted. If I am not 
much mistaken, her whole nature is designed for this, so that 
what I ask for is precisely what she gives—indeed, what she 
asks for. What it all depends on is to keep watch on what the 
individual can give and what she requires as a consequence of 
that. My love affairs, therefore, always have a reality [Realitet| 
for me personally; they amount to a life factor, an educational 
period that { definitely know all about, and I often even link 
with it some skill or other. For the sake of the first girl, I 
learned to dance; for the sake of the little dancer, I learned to 
speak French. At that time, like all fools, I went to the market 
and was often cheated. Now I buy before the market opens. 
Perhaps she has exhausted one aspect of the interesting; her in- 
closed life seems to indicate that. The point, then, is to find an- 
other aspect that at first glance may not seem so to her but that 
precisely because of this impediment becomes interesting to 
her. To that end, I choose not the poetic but the prosaic. So this 
is the beginning. First of all, her womanliness is neutralized by 
prosaic common sense and ridicule, not directly but indirectly, 
at the same time by the absolutely neutral, namely, intellect. 
She almost loses the feeling of being a woman, but in this state 
she is not able to stand out alone; she throws herself into my 
arms, not as if I were a lover—no, still completely neutrally. 
Now her womanliness is aroused; one coaxes it forth to its ex- 
treme point of elasticity, allows her to offend against some ac- 
tual validity or other. She goes beyond it; her womanliness 
reaches almost supranatural heights; she belongs to me with a 
world of passion. 
The fifth 
Well, I did not need to go far. She visits at the home of Mr. 
Baxter the wholesaler. Here I found not only her but also a 
person who for me appeared just as opportunely. Edward,” 
the son of the house, is head over heels in love with her—it 
takes but half an eye to see it when one looks into his eyes. He 
is in the business, in his father’s office, a good-looking fellow, 


The Seducer’s Diary 347 


very pleasant, a bit shy, and I believe this last trait does not 
damage him in her eyes. 


Poor Edward! He does not have the slightest idea how to 
proceed with his love. When he knows she is going to be there 
in the evening, he dresses for her sake alone, puts on his new 
black suit for her sake alone, his fancy cuffs for her sake 
alone—and thus cuts an almost ludicrous figure among the 
other daily company in the drawing room. His bashfulness 
verges on the unbelievable. If it were a guise, then Edward 
would be a dangerous rival to me. It takes great art to use bash- 
fulness, but one does achieve a great deal with it. How often J 
have used bashfulness to trick a little miss! Ordinarily, young 
girls speak very harshly about bashful men, but secretly they 
like them. A little bashfulness flatters a teenage girl’s vanity, 
makes her feel superior; it is her earnest money. When they are 
lulled to sleep, then at the very time they believe you are about 
to perish from bashfulness, you show them that you are so far 
from it that you are quite self-reliant. Bashfulness makes a 
man lose his masculine significance, and therefore it is a rela- 
tively good means for neutralizing the sex relation. Therefore, 
when they perceive that it was only a guise, they become so 
abashed that they blush inwardly, feel very strongly that in a 
way they have overstepped their limits; it is just as if they con- 
tinued to treat a boy as a child too long. 


The seventh 

So now we are friends, Edward and I. There is between us a 
true friendship, a beautiful relationship, such as has not existed 
since the most beautiful days of Greece. We were on intimate 
terms at once when, after having involved him in a multiplic- 
ity of observations about Cordelia, I managed to make him 
confess his secret. Of course, when all the secrets come out to- 
gether, then this one can come along. Poor fellow, he has been 
pining for a long time already. He spruces himself up every 
time she comes, then escorts her home in the evening; his heart 
pounds at the thought of her arm resting on his. They walk 
home, looking at the stars. He rings her doorbell; she disap- 


318 


348 Either/Or, I 


pears; he despairs—but has hopes for the next time. As yet he 
has not had the courage to step across her threshold, he who 
has such a superb opportunity. Although I cannot refrain from 
secretly deriding Edward, there is nevertheless something 
beautiful in his childlikeness. Although I ordinarily fancy my- 
self to be fairly conversant with the whole sum and substance 
of the erotic, I have never noticed this state in myself, this anx- 
iety and trembling of infatuation, that is, to the degree that it 
deprives me of my composure, for at other times I know it all 
right, but with me it is such that it makes me stronger instead. 
Perhaps someone would say that I have never really been in 
love—maybe so. I have taken Edward to task; I have encour- 
aged him to depend upon my friendship. Tomorrow he will 
take a decisive step, go in person to her and invite her. I man- 
aged to lead him to the preposterous idea of inviting me to go 
along; I promised him to do so. He takes it as an extraordinary 
show of friendship. The situation is just as I want it; it amounts 
to bursting unexpectedly through the door into the room. 
Should she have the remotest doubt about the significance of 
my appearance, my appearance will in turn confuse every- 
thing. 


Previously it has never been my habit to prepare myself for 
my conversations; now it has become a necessity for me in or- 
der to entertain the aunt. In other words, I have now taken on 
the respectable commission of conversing with her and 
thereby covering Edward’s infatuated approaches to Cordelia. 
Earlier, the aunt lived out in the country, and I am making 
considerable progress in knowledge of and competence in the 
subject through the aunt’s communications based on her ex- 
perience as well as through my own careful study of works in 
agronomy. 


I am scoring a big success with the aunt; she regards me as a 
stable and steady person, someone with whom it is really a 
pleasure to associate, not like some of our stylish young dan- 
dies. I do not seem to stand very well with Cordelia. To be 
sure, she is too purely and innocently womanly to require that 


The Seducer’s Diary 349 


every man pay his respects to her, but she still feels far too 
much the rebelliousness in my character. 


When I am sitting this way in the cozy drawing room, when 
she, like a good angel, is spreading loveliness everywhere, 
over all with whom she comes in touch, over good and evil, I 
at times lose patience inwardly and am tempted to rush out of 
my hiding place, for although I am sitting before the eyes of all 
in the drawing room, I am still on watch. am tempted to seize 
her hand, to enfold the girl in my arms, to hide her inside me 
for fear that someone might take her away from me. Or when 
Edward and I take our leave of them in the evening, when she 
extends her hand in farewell and I hold it in mine, I find it very 
difficult at times to let the bird slip out of my hand. Patience— 
quod antea fuit impetus, nunc ratio est [what was impulse then is 
science now]’”&gt;—she must be spun into my web in a totally dif- 
ferent way, and then suddenly I shall let the full force of love 
burst forth. We have not spoiled that moment for ourselves by 
spooning, by premature anticipations—you can thank me for 
that, my Cordelia. 1am working to develop the contrast; Iam 
pulling the bow of love tighter in order to wound all the 
deeper. Like an archer, I slacken the string, pull it tight again, 
listen to its song; it is my martial music, but as yet I do not 
aim—as yet I do not place the arrow to the string. 


When a small number of people often come together in the 
same room, a tradition readily develops as to where each in- 
dividual has his place, his station; it becomes a kind of picture 
a person can unroll for himself when he so desires, a map of the 
terrain. So it is also with us in the Wahl house—together we 
form a picture. We drink tea there evenings. The aunt, who 
until now has been sitting on the sofa, usually moves to the lit- 
tle sewing table, which place Cordelia in turn vacates. She 
then goes over to the tea table in front of the sofa; Edward fol- 
lows her, and I follow the aunt. Edward strives for an air of 
mystery. He wants to whisper and usually does it so well that 
he becomes entirely mute; I make no secret of my effusions to 
the aunt—market prices, an estimate of how many quarts of 
milk it takes for one pound of butter through the medium of 


319 


320 


350 Either/Or, I 


cream and the dialectic of the butter churn. Indeed, it is not 
only something any young girl can listen to without harm, 
but, what is far more unusual, it is a solid and fundamental and 
edifying conversation that is equally ennobling to the head and 
the heart. I usually turn my back to the tea table and to Ed- 
ward’s and Cordelia’s romance; I romance with the aunt. And 
is not nature magnificent and wise in what she produces, what 
a precious gift is butter, what a glorious accomplishment of 
nature and art! The aunt would surely not be able to hear what 
was being said between Edward and Cordelia, assuming that 
something really was being said—this I had promised Ed- 
ward, and I always keep my word. I, however, can hear per- 
fectly every single word that is exchanged, hear every move- 
ment. It is very important to me, because what a person may 
venture in his despair cannot be known. The most circumspect 
and most timid people at times dare to do the most extreme 
things. Although I do not have the slightest to do with the two 
isolated people, I nevertheless can readily perceive in Cordelia 
that I am always invisibly present between her and Edward. 


But it is a curious picture we four make together. I presum- 
ably could find an analogy if I were to think of well-known 
types, and then I might think of myself'as Mephistopheles, but 
the difficulty is that Edward is no Faust. If I make myself 
Faust, then the difficulty again is that Edward certainly is no 
Mephistopheles. Nor am I a Mephistopheles, least of all in Ed- 
ward’s eyes. He regards me as the good jinni of his love, and 
in that he is right; at least he can be sure that no one watches 
over his love more carefully than I do. I have promised him to 
engage the aunt in conversation, and I carry out this respect- 
able duty most earnestly. The aunt almost vanishes before our 
eyes in pure agronomy; we go into the kitchen and the cellars, 
up into the attic, look at the chickens and ducks, geese, etc. All 
this offends Cordelia. She, of course, cannot comprehend 
what I really want. I remain an enigma to her, but an enigma 
that does not tempt her to guess but that exasperates, indeed, 
makes her indignant. She senses very well that her aunt is be- 
coming almost ludicrous, and yet she is such a respectable lady 


The Seducer’s Diary 351 


that she certainly does not deserve it. On the other hand, I do 
it so well that she is fully aware that it would be futile for her 
to try to sway me. Sometimes I carry it so far that I make Cor- 
delia very secretly smile at her aunt. These are exercises that 
must be done. It is not as if I were doing this in conjunction 
with Cordelia—far from it; then I would never bring her to 
smile at her aunt. I remain unchanged, earnest, thorough, but 
she cannot help smiling. This is the first false teaching: we 
must teach her to smile ironically, but this smile applies to me 
just as much as to the aunt; for she does not know at all what 
to think of me. But it could just be that I was the kind of young 
man who became old prematurely; it is possible; there could 
be a second possibility, a third, etc. Having smiled at her aunt, 
she is indignant with herself; I turn around and, while I con- 
tinue to speak with the aunt, I look very gravely at her, where- 
upon she smiles at me, at the situation. 


Our relationship is not the tender and trusting embrace of 
understanding, not one of attraction; it is the repulsion of mis- 
understanding. There is actually nothing at all in my relation- 
ship with her; it is purely intellectual, which for a young girl is 
naturally nothing at all. The method I employ has nevertheless 
its extraordinary conveniences. A person who plays the gal- 
lant arouses suspicions and stirs up resistance to himself; Iam 
exempt from all that. 1am not being watched; on the contrary, 
Tam marked rather as a dependable man fit to watch over the 
young girl. The method has only one defect, which is that it is 
slow, but for that reason it can be used successfully against in- 
dividuals only when the interesting is to be gained. 


What a reinvigorating power a young girl has—not the 
freshness of the morning air, not the sighing of the wind, not 
the coolness of the sea, not the fragrance of wine, its aroma— 
nothing in the world has this reinvigorating power. 


I hope that soon I shall have brought her to the point where 
she hates me. I have assumed completely the character of a 
confirmed bachelor. I talk about nothing else than sitting com- 
fortably, lying at ease, having a trusty servant, a friend with 


321 


322 


352 Either/Or, I 


good footing so that I can rely on him when we walk arm in 
arm. Now, if I can persuade the aunt to forsake her agricultural 
observations, I can lead her in this direction in order to have a 
more direct occasion for irony. One may laugh at a bachelor, 
indeed, have little pity for him; but a young man who (al- 
though not devoid of intelligence) by such behavior outrages 
a young girl—all the significance of her sex, its beauty and its 
poetry, is annihilated. 


In this way the days go by. I see her but do not speak with 
her; I speak with the aunt in her presence. Occasionally at 
night, it may cross my mind to pour out my love. Then, 
wrapped in my cape, with my hat pulled down over my eyes, 
I go and walk outside her windows. Her bedroom faces the 
courtyard but is visible from the street, since the place is on a 
corner. Sometimes she stands at the window for a moment, or 
she opens it and looks up at the stars, unseen by all but the one 
by whom she would least of all think to be noticed. In these 
nocturnal hours, I walk around like a ghost; like a ghost I in- 
habit the place where her dwelling is. Then I forget every- 
thing, have no plans, no reckonings, cast understanding over- 
board, expand and fortify my chest with deep sighs, a motion 
I need in order not to suffer from my systematic conduct. 
Others are virtuous by day, sin at night; 1am dissimulation by 
day—at night I am sheer desire. If she saw me here, if she could 
look into my soul—if. 

If this girl is willing to understand herself, she must admit 
that [ am a man for her. She is too intense, too deeply moved, 
to be happy in marriage; it would be too meager for her to let 
herself fall for an outright seducer; when she falls for me, she 
will rescue the interesting out of the shipwreck. In relation to 
me, she must, as the philosophers say with a play on words: 
zu Grunde gehn [fall to the ground]. 


She really is weary of listening to Edward. Just as always, 
when cramped limits are set for the interesting, one discovers 
all the more. Sometimes she listens to my conversation with 
the aunt. When I notice it, far off on the horizon there comes a 
flashing intimation from a quite different world, to the aston- 
ishment of the aunt as well as of Cordelia. The aunt sees the 


The Seducer’s Diary 353 


lightning but hears nothing; Cordelia hears the voice but sees 
nothing. But at the same moment everything is in its quiet or- 
der; the conversation between the aunt and me proceeds in its 
uniform way, like post horses in the stillness of the night; the 
sad hum of the samovar accompanies it. At such moments, it 
can sometimes be uncomfortable in the drawing room, espe- 
cially for Cordelia. She has no one she can talk with or listen 
to. If she turns to Edward, she runs the risk that he will do 
something stupid in his bashfulness; if she turns to the other 
side, toward the aunt and me, the assurance dominant here, 
the monotonous hammer stroke of the rhythmical conversa- 
tion, produces the most disagreeable contrast with Edward’s 
lack of assurance. I can well understand that it must seem to 
Cordelia as if the aunt were bewitched, so perfectly does she 
move to the tempo of my rhythm. She cannot participate in 
this conversation either, because one of the means I have also 
used to outrage her is that I allow myself to treat her just like a 
child. It is not as if I for that reason would allow myself any 
liberties whatever with her, far from it. I well know the upset- 
ting effects such things can have, and the point is that her 
womanliness must be able to rise up pure and beautiful again. 
Because of my intimate relationship with the aunt, it is easy for 
me to treat her like a child who has no understanding of the 
world. Her womanliness is not insulted thereby but merely 
neutralized, for the fact that she does not know market prices 
cannot insult her womanliness, but the supposition that this is 
the ultimate in life can certainly be revolting to her. With my 
powerful assistance on this score, the aunt is outdoing herself. 
She has become almost fanatic—something she can thank me 
for. The only thing about me that she cannot stand is that I 
have no position. Now I have adopted the habit of saying 
whenever a vacancy in some office is mentioned: ‘“There is a 
position for me,” and thereupon discuss it very gravely with 
her. Cordelia always perceives the irony, which is precisely 
what I want. 


Poor Edward! It is a shame that he is not called Fritz.”” Every 
time I ponder my relationship with him, I always think of 
Fritz in The Bride.” Moreover, like his prototype, Edward is 


323 


I 
324 


354 Either/Or, I 


a corporal in the civic militia. To be honest, Edward is also 
rather boring. He is doing it all wrong, always arrives so for- 
mal and spruced up. Out of friendship for him, unter uns gesagt 
{just between us], I come visiting dressed as negligently as 
possible. Poor Edward! The one thing that almost makes me 
feel bad is that he is so infinitely obliged to me that he hardly 
knows how he will thank me. For me to be thanked for it— 
that is too much. 


Why can’t you just be nice and quiet? What have you done 
all morning but shake my awnings, tug at my window street- 
mirror and the cord on it, play with the bellpull wire from the 
fourth floor, push against the windowpanes—in short, pro- 
claim your existence in every way as if you wanted to beckon 
me out to you? Yes, the weather is fine enough, but I have no 
inclination; let me stay home. ”—You playful, exuberant 
zephyrs, you happy lads, go by yourselves; have your fun as 
always with the young girls. Yes, I know, no one knows how 
to embrace a young girl as seductively as you. It is futile for her 
to try to wriggle away from you; she cannot extricate herself 
from your snares—nor does she wish to, for you cool and re- 
fresh and do not agitate. Go your own way! Leave me out of 
it. But then you think you have no enjoyment in it; you are not 
doing it for your own sake. Well, then, I shall go along with 
you, but on two conditions. —Number one. On Kongens 
Nytorv there lives a young girl; she is very lovely but also has 
the effrontery to be unwilling to love me—yes, what is worse, 
she loves someone else, and it has gone so far that they go 
walking together arm in arm. I know he goes to fetch her at 
one o’clock. Now promise me that the strongest winds among 
you will remain hidden somewhere nearby until the moment 
he comes through the street door with her. The very moment 
he is about to turn down Store Kongensgade, this detachment 
will rush out and in the most courteous way take the hat off his 
head and carry it at a steady speed exactly one yard ahead of 
him—not any faster, for then it is conceivable that he would go 
home. He continually expects to grab it the next second; he 
does not even let go of her arm. In that manner you will lead 


The Seducer’s Diary 355 


him and her through Store Kongensgade along the wall to 
Nerreport, to Haibroplads. —How long will that take? I think 
just about a half hour. Exactly at half past one, | shall approach 
from Mstergade. Now, when the detachment has led the lov- 
ers out into the middle of the square, a powerful attack will be 
made on them in which you will also snatch off her hat, di- 
shevel her curls, carry off her shawl, while all this time his hat 
is jubilantly rising aloft higher and higher. In short, you will 
produce such a confusion that not only I but the very honored 
public will burst into roars of laughter, the dogs will begin to 
bark, the tower watchman to toll. You will contrive to have 
her hat soar over to me, who will be the lucky fellow who 
hands it over to her. —Number two. The unit that accompa- 
nies me will obey my every suggestion, keep within the 
bounds of propriety, insult no pretty girl, take no more liber- 
ties than will allow her childlike soul, during the entire joke, 
to preserve its delight, her lips their smile, her eyes their calm- 
ness, and her heart to remain without anxiety. If one of you 
dares to act in any other way, may your name be cursed. — 
And now be off to life and gladness, to youth and beauty. 
Show me what I so often have seen, what I never grow weary 
of seeing; show me a beautiful young girl and unfurl her 
beauty to me in such a way that she herself becomes even more 
beautiful; examine her in such a way that she finds joy in the 
examination! —I choose Bredgade, but remember, I have at 
my disposal only the time until half past one.— 

There comes a young girl, all starched and dressed up—to 
be sure, it is Sunday today. —Cool her offa bit, fan her, stroke 
her with gentle breezes, embrace her with your innocent 
touch! What delicate reddening of her cheeks I detect! Her lips 
become more vividly colored; her bosom rises. —Is it not 
true, my girl, that it is indescribable, that it is blissful pleasure 
to breathe this fresh air? The little collar flutters like a leaf. 
How healthy and full her breathing. Her pace slackens, she is 
almost carried along by the gentle breeze—like a cloud, like a 
dream. —Blow a little harder, in longer drafts! —She pulls 
herself together, draws her arms closer to her bosom, which 
she covers more carefully lest a puff of wind be too indiscreet 


325 


I 
326 


356 Either/Or, I 


and sneak in agilely and coolly under this light covering. — 
Her color rises, her cheeks become full, her eyes clearer, her 
step more rhythmic. All opposition enhances a person’s 
beauty. Every young girl ought to fall in love with a zephyr, 
for no man knows how to heighten her beauty the way it does 
when it skirmishes with her. —Her body leans forward a bit; 
she is looking down at the toes of her shoes. —Stop for a 
while! You are blowing too hard, and her body hunches up 
and loses its beautiful slimness. —Cool her off a little! —Isn’t 
it refreshing, my girl, when you are warm and then feel these 
cooling shivers? You could fling out your arms in gratitude, in 
joy over existence. —She turns sideways—now, quickly, a 
powerful puff so that I can have a hint of the beauty of her 
form. —A bit stronger so that the folds cling more closely. — 
It is too much! Her bearing becomes ungraceful; her light foot- 
step is thrown off. She turns around again. —Blow, now, let 
her prove herself! —That is enough, that is too much: one of 
her curls has tumbled down. —Control yourselves, please! — 
There comes a whole regiment marching: 


Die eine ist verliebt gar sehr; 

Die andre ware es gerne 

[The one is very much in love; 

The other would very much like to be].®° 


Yes, it is undeniably a bad employment in life to go walking 
with a prospective brother-in-law on his left arm. For a girl, it 
is just about the same as it is for a man to be a supplementary 
clerk. —But the supplementary clerk can advance; moreover, 
he has his place in the office, is present on special occasions— 
this is not the sister-in-law’s fate. But then in compensation 
her advancement is not so slow—when she advances and is 
moved into another office. —Blow a little harder now! If you 
have something firm to hold onto, you can offer resistance all 
right. —The center presses forward vigorously; the wings are 
unable to follow. —He stands firmly enough. The wind can- 
not budge him; he is too heavy for that—but also too heavy for 
the wings to be able to lift him from the earth. He charges 
ahead to show—that he is a heavy body. But the more un- 


The Seducer’s Diary 357 


moved he remains, the more the girls suffer from it. —My 
beautiful ladies, may I not be of service with some good ad- 
vice: Leave the prospective husband and brother-in-law out of 
it; ®'try to walk all alone, and you will have much more enjoy- 
ment out of it. —Blow more gently now, please! —How they 
toss about in the waves of wind; now they are performing 
dance steps sideways down the street—can any dance music 
evoke a livelier cheerfulness? And yet the wind does not ex- 
haust them; it strengthens. —Now, side by side, they sweep 
along down the street in full sail—can any waltz sweep a 
young girl along more seductively, and yet the wind is not tir- 
ing but sustaining. Now they turn around and face the hus- 
band and brother-in-law. —Isn’t it true that a little resistance 
is pleasant? You willingly struggle in order to come into pos- 
session of what you love, and very likely you will attain what 
you are fighting for. There is a higher Governance that comes 
to the aid of love; that is why the man has the wind in his favor. 
—Did I not organize it right: if you have the wind on your 
own back, you can easily rush past the beloved, but when it is 
against you, you are pleasantly stimulated; then you fly to the 
beloved’s side, and the puffing of the wind makes you health- 
ier, more tempting, more seductive, and the puffing of the 
wind cools the fruit of your lips, which is enjoyed best when 
cold, because it is so hot, just as champagne inflames when it 
almost chills. —How they laugh and talk—and the wind car- 
ries the words away; is there really anything to talk about? — 
And they laugh again and lean against the wind and hold on to 
their hats and watch their feet. —Better stop now, lest the 
young girls become impatient and angry with us or afraid of 
us! 

That’s right, resolutely and powerfully, the right foot be- 
fore the left. —How boldly and saucily she looks around at the 
world. —If I am seeing right, she is indeed holding on to the 
person’s arm and therefore is engaged. Let me see what pres- 
ent you received on life’s Christmas tree, my child. —Ah, yes! 
He really seems to be a very solid fiancé. So she is in the first 
stage of the engagement; she loves him—maybe so, but her 
love, broad and copious, nevertheless flutters loosely about 


I 
327 


328 


358 Either/Or, I 


him. She still possesses the cloak of love that can cover a mul- 
titude.®? —Blow a little harder! —Well, if you walk so fast, it 
is no wonder that the ribbons on your hat stretch against the 
wind, making it look as if these, like wings, were carrying this 
light creature—and her love—and it, too, follows like a fairy 
veil the wind plays with. Yes, when love is looked at in this 
way, it seems so copious, but when onc is to be dressed in it, 
when the veil is to be sewed into a housedress—then there is 
not material for many puffs.°&gt; —Good heavens! If you have 
the courage to risk a step decisive for your whole life, should 
you not have the heart to go straight against the wind? Who 
doubts it? Not I—but no temper tantrum, my little miss, no 
temper tantrum. Time is a hard disciplinarian, and the wind is 
not so bad either. —Tease her a little! —What happened to the 
handkerchief? All right, you have it again. There went one of 
the ribbons from your hat. —It is really very embarrassing for 
the prospective one who is present. —There comes a girl 
friend you must greet. It is the first time she has seen you as a 
fiancée; of course, it is to make an appearance as a fiancée that 
you are here on Bredgade and intend to go out on Langelinie. 
As far as I know, it is the custom for the newlyweds to go to 
church the first Sunday after the wedding; the newly engaged, 
however, walk on Langelinie. Well, generally an engagement 
does have much in common with Langelinie. —Watch out, 
now, the wind is taking your hat. Hang on to it, bend your 
head down. —It is really too bad that you did not manage to 
greet your girl friend at all, did not gain the composure to 
greet her with the superior air an engaged girl is supposed to 
assume before the not-engaged. —Blow more gently now! — 
Good days are coming now. 

How she clings to her beloved; now she is far enough ahead 
of him to turn her head and look up at him and rejoice in him, 
her wealth, her good fortune, her hope, her future. —O my 
girl, you make too much of him. —Or does he not have me 
and the wind to thank that he looks.so vigorous? And do you 
yourself not have me and the soft breezes, which now healed 
you and made you cast your pain into oblivion, to thank that 


The Seducer’s Diary 359 


you yourself look so exuberant, so full of longing and antici- 
pation? 


I do not want a student 

Who lies and reads at night, 

But I do want an officer 

Who goes with feathers in his hat.** 


One sees it in you at once, my girl; there is something in your 
look. —No, a student is by no means good enough for you. — 
But why exactly an officer? A university graduate *all 
through with his studies—would he not serve just as well? — 
But right now I can provide you with neither an officer nor a 
university graduate. But I can provide some tempering cool 
breezes. —Blow a little now! —That was fine. Toss the silk 
scarf back over the shoulder; walk very slowly so that your 
cheeks become a bit more pale, the glow of your eyes not so 
intense. —Just so. Yes, a little exercise, especially in such de- 
lightful weather as today, and then a little patience, and you 
will surely have your officer. 

There go two who are destined for each other. What rhythm 
in their step, what assurance, built on mutual trust, in their 
whole bearing; what harmonia praestabilita [preestablished har- 
mony]* in all their movements, what self-sufficient solidity. 
They are not light and graceful in posture; they are not dancing 
with each other. No, there is durability about them, a boldness 
that awakens an infallible hope, that inspires mutual respect. I 
wager that their view of life is this: life is a road. And they do 
seem determined to walk arm in arm with each other through 
life’s joys and sorrows. ®’They are so harmonious that the lady 
has even surrendered her claim to walk on the flagstones. — 
But, you dear zephyrs, why are you so busy with that couple? 
They do not seem to be worth the attention. Is there anything 
in particular to look at? **—But it is half past one—off to H@i- 
broplads. 


One would not believe it possible to plot so entirely accu- 
rately the history of the development of a psyche. It shows 
how sound Cordelia is. Truly, she is a remarkable girl. To be 


330 


360 Either/Or, I 


sure, she is quiet and modest, unassuming, but yet there is un- 
consciously within her an enormous claim. —This struck me 
today when I saw her go into her house. The little resistance 
that a puff of wind can give seems to arouse all the forces 
within her, but there nevertheless is no inner conflict. She is 
not an insignificant little girl who vanishes between one’s fin- 
gers, so frail that one is almost afraid that she will break in two 
when looked at, but neither is she a pretentious ornamental 
flower. Therefore, like a physician, I can delight in observing 
all the symptoms in this health record. 


In my attack, Iam beginning to close in on her gradually, to 
shift into a more direct attack. If I were to indicate this change 
on my military map of the family, I would say: I have turned 
my chair so that I am now turned sideways toward her. I am 
involved with her more; I address her, elicit her response. Her 
soul has passion, intensity, and, without being brought to the 
point of oddity by vain and foolish reflections, she has a need 
for the unusual. My irony over the foolishness of people, my 
ridicule of their cowardliness, of their tepid torpidity, capti- 
vate her. She likes to drive the sun chariot across the arch of 
heaven and to come close enough to earth to scorch people a 
little. But she does not trust me; as yet I have prevented every 
approach, even in an intellectual sense. She must be strength- 
ened within herself before I let her find support from me. Now 
and then it may seem as if I were seeking to make her my con- 
fidante in my freemasonry, but that is only momentary. She 
herself must be developed within herself; she must feel the re- 
silience of her soul; she must come to grips with the world and 
lift it. In her eyes and in what she says, it is easy for me to see 
the progress she is making; only once have I seen a devastating 
wrath there. She must owe me nothing, for she must be free. 
Only in freedom is there love; only in freedom are there diver- 
sion and everlasting amusement. Although I am making ar- 
rangements so that she will sink into my arms as if by a neces- 
sity of nature and am striving to make her gravitate toward 
me, the point nevertheless is that she should not fall like a 
heavy body but as mind should gravitate toward mind. Al- 


The Seducer’s Diary 361 


though she will belong to me, yet it must not be in the un- 
beautiful way of resting upon me as a burden. She must be nei- 
ther an appendage in the physical sense nor an obligation in the 
moral sense. Between us two, only freedom’s own game will 
prevail. She must be so light to me that I can carry her on my 
arm. 


Almost too much does Cordelia preoccupy me. I am losing 
my balance again—not face-to-face with her when she is pres- 
ent, but when I am alone with her in the strictest sense. I may 
yearn for her, not in order to speak with her but merely to have 
her image float past me; when I know she has gone out, I may 
stealthily follow her, not to be seen but to see. The other eve- 
ning, we left the Baxter house together; Edward escorted her. 
I parted from them in the greatest haste, hurried over to an- 
other street where my servant was waiting for me. In no time 
at all, [had changed my clothes and met her again without her 
suspecting it. Edward was just as mute as ever. I certainly am 
in love, but not in the ordinary sense, and one must be ex- 
tremely careful about that; it always has dangerous conse- 
quences, and, after all, one is that way only once. But the god 
of love is blind, and if one is clever, he can surely be fooled. 
The art is to be as receptive as possible to impressions, to know 
what impression one is making and what impression one has 
of each girl. In that way, one can be in love with many girls at 
the same time, because one is in love in a different way with 
each one. To love one girl is too little; to love all is superficial- 
ity; to know oneself and to love as many as possible, to let 
one’s soul conceal all the powers of love inside itself so that 
each receives its specific nourishment while the consciousness 
nevertheless embraces the whole—that is enjoyment, that is 
living. 


July 3 

Edward really cannot complain about me. As a matter of 
fact, I want Cordelia to fall in love with him so that through 
him she will acquire a distaste for plain and simple love and 
thereby go beyond her own limits, but that requires in partic- 


331 


332 


362 Either/Or, I 


ular that Edward not be a caricature, for that is of no help. 
Now, Edward is not only a good match in the bourgeois 
sense, which does not mean anything to her—a girl of seven- 
teen does not care about such things—but he has several ap- 
pealing personal qualities that I try to help him show in the 
most advantageous light. Like a lady’s maid or a decorator, I 
deck him out as well as the resources of the house allow—in 
fact, I sometimes hang a little borrowed finery on him. When 
we go together over there, it seems very strange to me to walk 
along at his side. To me it is as if he were my brother, my son, 
and yet he is my friend, my contemporary, my rival. He can 
never become dangerous to me. Hence, the higher I can ele- 
vate him, since he is bound to fall, the better it is, the more it 
awakens in Cordelia a consciousness of what she disdains, the 
more intense the presentiment of what she desires. I lend him 
a helping hand, I recommend him—in short, I do everything 
a friend can do for a friend. In order to set my own coldness in 
relief, I almost rant against Edward. I characterize him as a 
dreamer. Since Edward does not know how to help himself at 
all, I have to push him forward. 


Cordelia hates and fears me. What does a young girl fear? 
Intellect [Aand]. Why? Because intellect constitutes the nega- 
tion of her entire womanly existence. Masculine handsome- 
ness, prepossessing nature, etc. are fine resources. One can 
also make a conquest with them but never win a complete vic- 
tory. Why? Because one is making war on a girl in her own 
sphere of power, and in her own sphere of power she is always 
the stronger. With these resources, one can make a girl blush, 
drop her eyes, but one can never generate the indescribable, 
captivating anxiety that makes her beauty interesting. 


Non formosus erat, sed erat facundus Ulixes, 

Et tamen aequoreas torsit amore Deas 

[Ulysses was not comely, but he was eloquent, 
Yet he fired two goddesses of the sea with love].*° 


Now, everyone ought to know his own powers. But some- 
thing that has often shocked me is that even those who have 


The Seducer’s Diary 363 


talents act like such bunglers. A person actually ought to be 
able to see immediately in any young girl who has become a 
victim to another’s love—or, more correctly, to her own—in 
what way she has been deceived. The practiced killer uses a 
particular stab, and the experienced policeman immediately 
recognizes the criminal when he sees the wound. But where 
does one meet such systematic seducers, such psychologists? 
For most people, to seduce a young girl means to seduce a 
young girl, period—and yet a whole language is concealed in 
this thought. 


Being a woman—she hates me; being a talented woman— 
she fears me; being a good mind—she loves me. This conflict 
I have now established in her soul as the first step. My pride, 
my defiance, my cold ridicule, my callous irony tempt her— 
not as if she would want to love me—no, there is certainly not 
the slightest trace of any such feelings in her, least of all for me. 
She wants to compete with me. What tempts her is the proud 
independence in relation to people, a freedom like that of the 
desert Arabs. My laughter and eccentricity neutralize every 
erotic expression. She is fairly free with me, and insofar as 
there is any reserve, it is more intellectual than womanly. She 
is so far from seeing a lover in me that our relationship is only 
that of two good minds. She takes me by the hand, clasps 
my hand, laughs, pays a certain attention to me in the purely 
Greek sense. Then when the ironist and the ridiculer have 
duped her long enough, I follow the instructions in an old 
verse: the knight spreads out his cape so red and bids the beau- 
tiful maiden sit on it.” I spread out my cape—not in order to 
sit on the greensward with her but to vanish into the air with 
her in a flight of thought. Or I do not take her along but set 
myself astride a thought, wave at her, throw her a kiss, and be- 
come invisible to her, only audible in the hum of winged 
words; I, unlike Jehovah,?! become not more and more visible 
in the voice, but less and less, for the more I speak the higher I 
ascend. Then she wants to go along, away on this bold flight 
of thought. But it is just for a moment; the next instant I am 
cold and arid.” 


333 


I 
334 


364 Either/Or, I 


There are various kinds of womanly blushes. There is the 
dense brick-red blush. “This is the one novelists always have 
in good supply when they have their heroines blush tiber und 
tiber [through and through]. There is the delicate blush; it is the 
spirit’s sunrise-red. In a young girl it is priceless. The fleeting 
blush that accompanies a happy thought is beautiful in a man, 
more beautiful in a youth, lovely in a woman. It is a flash of 
lightning, the summer lightning of the spirit. It is most beau- 
tiful in a youth, lovely in a girl, because it manifests itself in its 
virginal purity and thus also has the modesty of surprise. The 
older one grows, the more this kind of blush disappears. 


Sometimes I read something aloud to Cordelia—for the 
most part very trivial things. As usual, Edward has to be an 
unwitting instrument—that is, I have pointed out to him that 
lending a girl books is a very good way to establish rapport 
with her. Indeed, he has gained in various ways thereby, for 
she is much obliged to him for it. 1am the one who gains the 
most, for I determine the choice of books and continually stay 
in the background. Here I have a wide playground for making 
my observations. I can give Edward whichever books I want 
to; literature is not his line; I can try what I wish, to any ex- 
treme whatsoever. Now when I visit her in the evening, I pick 
up the book as if by chance, leaf through it a little, read half 
aloud, commend Edward for his attentiveness. Last evening, 
by means of a test, I wanted to assure myself of the resilience 
of her soul. I was puzzled about whether I should have Edward 
lend her Schiller’s Gedichte so that I could accidentally come 
across Thekla’s song™ to recite, or Biirger’s Gedichte. I se- 
lected the latter, especially because his “Lenore” is somewhat 
highflown, however beautiful it is otherwise. I opened it to 
“Lenore” and read this poem aloud with all the pathos I could 
muster. Cordelia was moved; she sewed hurriedly, as if it were 
she Vilhelm came to fetch. I stopped; the aunt had listened 
without very much sympathy. She has no fear of any Vilhelms 
living or dead and, moreover, does not know German well, 
but she found herself quite in her element when I showed her 
the beautifully bound copy and started a conversation about 


The Seducer’s Diary 365 


bookbinding work. *My intention was to destroy in Cordelia 
the impression of pathos the very moment it was awakened. 
She became a little anxious, but it was apparent to me that this 
anxiety did not have a tempting effect on her but made her un- 
heimlich [uncomfortable]. 

Today my eyes have rested upon her for the first time. It is 
said that sleep can make the eyelids so heavy that they close by 
themselves; perhaps this glance would be capable of some- 
thing similar. Her eyes close, and yet dark forces stir within 
her. She does not see that I am looking at her; she feels it, feels 
it through her entire body. Her eyes close, and it is night, but 
within her it is bright day. 

Edward must go. He is at the last extremity; I can expect 
that at any moment he will go and make a declaration of love 
to her. No one knows that better than I, his confidant, who 
with diligence keep him overwrought so that he can influence 
Cordelia all the more. But to let him confess his love is too 
risky. I know very well that he will receive a “No,” but that 
will not be the end of the story. He will certainly take it very 
hard. This perhaps will move and agitate Cordelia. Although 
in that case I need not fear the worst, that she would change 
her mind, nevertheless her soul’s pride will possibly suffer 
from this unalloyed compassion. If that happens, my whole 
intention with Edward will be a complete failure. 


My relationship with Cordelia is beginning to take a dra- 
matic course. Something has to happen; whatever it is, I can 
no longer have a relationship simply as an observer without 
letting the moment slip by. She must be surprised; it is neces- 
sary, but if I wish to surprise her, I must be at my post. That 
which ordinarily would surprise perhaps would not affect her 
in that way. She must be really surprised in such a way that at 
the very beginning that which is close to being the cause of her 
surprise is something that happens quite ordinarily. It must 
gradually become manifest that nevertheless something sur- 
prising was implicit in it. This is always the law for the inter- 
esting, and this in turn is the law for all my moves with regard 
to Cordelia. If one just knows how to surprise, one always 


335 


336 


366 Either/Or, I 


wins the game. The energy of the person involved is tempo- 
rarily suspended; one makes it impossible for her to act, and 
this happens whether extraordinary or ordinary means are 
used. I still remember with a certain self-satisfaction a rash 
venture with a woman ofa rather aristocratic family. For some 
time, I had been covertly prowling around her looking for an 
interesting contact, but to no avail, and then one noon I met 
her on the street. I was certain that she did not recognize me or 
know that I lived here in the city. She was walking alone. | 
slipped by her and thus managed to meet her face-to-face. I 
stepped aside for her; she stayed on the flagstones. Just at that 
moment, I cast a sorrowful look at her; I believe I almost had 
tears in my eyes. I took off my hat. She stopped. With a shak- 
ing voice and a dreamy look, I said: Do not be angry, gracious 
lady; you have such a striking resemblance to a creature whom 
T love with all my soul, but who lives far away from me, that 
you will forgive my strange conduct. She believed I was a 
dreamer, and a young girl may very well like a little dreami- 
ness, especially when she also feels her superiority and dares to 
smile at one. Sure enough, she smiled, which was indescriba- 
bly becoming to her. With aristocratic condescension, she 
greeted me and smiled. She continued her walk; I accom- 
panied her for a few steps. I met her a few days later; I ventured 
to greet her. She laughed at me. —Patience is still a precious 
virtue, and he who laughs last laughs best. 


Various means of surprising Cordelia are conceivable. | 
could try to raise an erotic storm capable of tearing up trees by 
the roots. By means of it, I could see if it is possible to lift her 
off the ground, to lift her out of the historical context, and 
through secret meetings to generate her passion in this unset- 
tled state. It is not inconceivable that it could be done. A girl 
with her passion can be made to do anything one pleases. But 
it would be esthetically incorrect. I do not relish romantic gid- 
diness, and this state is to be commended only when one is 
dealing with girls who are able to acquire a poetic afterglow in 
no other way. Moreover, one easily loses out on the real en- 
joyment, for too much turmoil is also damaging. On her, it 


The Seducer’s Diary 367 


would completely fail in its effect. In a couple of drafts, I 
would have imbibed what I could have had the use of for a 
long time—indeed, worse yet, what I with circumspection 
could have enjoyed more fully and richly. Cordelia is not to be 
enjoyed ina state of elation. If I were to behave in that manner, 
she perhaps would be taken by surprise at first, but she would 
soon be sated, precisely because this surprise would lie too 
close to her audacious soul. 

A plain and simple engagement is the best of all means, the 
most suitable for the purpose. She will perhaps believe her 
own ears even less when she hears me make a prosaic declara- 
tion of love, also ask for her hand, even less than if she listened 
to my ardent eloquence, imbibed my poisonous intoxicating 
potion, heard her heart pound at the thought of an elope- 
ment.” 

The banefulness of an engagement is always the ethical in it. 
The ethical is just as boring in scholarship as in life. What a dif- 
ference! Under the esthetic sky, everything is buoyant, beau- 
tiful, transient; when ethics arrives on the scene, everything 
becomes harsh, angular, infinitely langweiligt [boring].°* But 
in the strictest sense an engagement does not have ethical real- 
ity [ Realitet] such as a marriage has; it has validity only ex con- 
sensu gentium [by universal consensus]. This ambiguity can be 
very advantageous for me. It has just enough of the ethical in 
it so that in due time Cordelia will gain the impression that she 
is transgressing the boundaries of the universal; moreover, the 
ethical in it is not so earnest that I have to fear a more serious 
jolt. 

I have always had a certain respect for the ethical. I have 
never made a promise of marriage to any girl, not even non- 
chalantly; insofar as it might seem that I am doing it here, it is 
merely a simulated move. I shall very likely manage things in 
such a way that it is she herself who breaks the engagement. 
My chivalrous pride has contempt for making promises. | 
have contempt when a judge entices a culprit into a confession 
with the promise of freedom. A judge like that renounces his 
power and his talent. In my practice, there is even the addi- 
tional circumstance that I desire nothing that in the strictest 


337 


368 Either/Or, I 


sense is not freedom’s gift. Let vulgar seducers use such 
means. What do they gain anyway? He who does not know 
how to encircle a girl so that she loses sight of everything he 
does not want her to see, he who does not know how to poet- 
ize himself into a girl so that it is from her that everything pro- 
ceeds as he wants it—he is and remains a bungler. I shall not 
envy him his enjoyment. Such a person is and remains a bun- 
gler, a seducer, which I can by no means be called. I am an es- 
thete, an eroticist, who has grasped the nature and the point of 
love, who believes in love and knows it from the ground up, 
and I reserve for myself only the private opinion that no love 
affair should last more than a half year at most and that any re- 
lationship is over as soon as one has enjoyed the ultimate. All 
this I] know; I also know that the highest enjoyment imagina- 
ble is to be loved, loved more than anything else in the world. 
To poetize oneself into a girl is an art; to poetize oneself out of 
her is a masterstroke. But the latter depends essentially on the 
former. 

There was the possibility of another way. I could do every- 
thing to get her engaged to Edward. I would then become a 
family friend. Edward would trust me unconditionally, for I 
would be the one to whom he would more or less owe his 
good fortune. I would thereby acquire a better camouflage. 
But it will not do. She cannot become engaged to Edward 
without her being diminished in one way or another. Add to 
that the fact that my relationship with her would become more 
engagingly provocative than interesting. The infinite prosi- 
ness of an engagement is precisely the sounding board for the 
interesting. 


Everything is becoming more momentous at the Wahl 
house. One clearly perceives that underneath the everyday 
routines there stirs a secret life that soon must proclaim itself 
in a corresponding disclosure. The Wahl household is making 
preparations for an engagement. A merely superficial observer 
might think that the couple would be the aunt and I. What 
could not such a marriage do for the propagation of agro- 
nomical knowledge in the next generation! So then I would be 


The Seducer’s Diary 369 


Cordelia’s uncle. I am a friend of freedom of thought, and no 
thought is so absurd that I do not have the courage to stick to 
it. Cordelia is apprehensive of a declaration of love from Ed- 
ward; Edward is hoping that such a declaration will decide 
everything. Indeed, he can be sure of that. But to spare him the 
unpleasant consequences of such a step, I shall steal a march on 
him. I hope to dismiss him soon; he is actually standing in my 
way. I really felt that today. Does he not look so dreamy and 
drunk with love that one may very well fear that he will sud- 
denly rise up like a sleepwalker and in front of the whole as- 
sembly confess his love from such an objective point of view 
that he will not even approach Cordelia. I looked daggers at 
him today. Just as an elephant picks up something with its 
trunk, I picked him up with my eyes, the whole of him, and 
tossed him over backward. Although he remained seated, I be- 
lieve that he nevertheless had a corresponding sensation in his 
entire body. 


Cordelia is not as self-confident in relation to me as she was 
before. She has always approached me with womanly assur- 
ance; now she is a little unsteady. But it does not mean very 
much, and it would not be difficult for me to put everything 
on the old footing. But that I shall not do. Just one more ex- 
ploration and then the engagement. There can be no difficul- 
ties in this. In her surprise, Cordelia will say “Yes,” the aunt a 
fervent ‘““Amen.” She will be beside herself with joy to have 
such an agronomist for a son-in-law. Son-in-law! How thick 
as thieves we all become when we venture into this domain! I 
shall not actually become her son-in-law, but only her nephew 
or, more correctly, volente deo [God willing], none of these. 


The twenty-third 

Today I harvested the fruit of a rumor I had started going 
around—that I was in love with a young girl. With Edward’s 
help, it also reached Cordelia’s ears. She is curious; she 
watches me, but she does not dare to inquire. And yet it is not 
unimportant for her to find out definitely, partly because it 
seems unbelievable to her, and partly because she almost sees 


I 
338 


339 


370 Either/Or, I 


in it a precedent for herself, because if such a cold scoffer as I 
can fall in love, then presumably she can also, without needing 
to be ashamed. Today I broached the subject. To tell a story in 
such a way that the point is not lost is, I believe, right up my 
alley—also, in such a way that it is not divulged prematurely. 
It is my delight to keep the listeners to my story in suspenso by 
means of minor actions of an episodic nature to ascertain how 
they want it to turn out, and then in the course of the telling to 
fool them. My art is to use amphibolies so that the listeners un- 
derstand one thing from what is said and then suddenly per- 
ceive that the words can be interpreted another way. If one 
really wants to have a chance to make investigations of a par- 
ticular kind, one must always deliver a speech. In a conversa- 
tion, the person in question can be more evasive, can, through 
questions and answers, better conceal the impression the 
words are making. 

With ceremonial earnestness, I began my speech to the aunt. 
“Shall I attribute this to the kindness of my friends or to the 
malice of my enemies, and who does not have too many of 
both the one and the other?” Here the aunt made a comment 
that I did everything in my power to spin out in order to keep 
Cordelia, who was listening, in suspense, a suspense she could 
not dispel since it was the aunt with whom I was talking, and 
my mood was very ceremonial. I continued: “Or shall I attrib- 
ute it to chance, the generatio aequivoca [spontaneous genera- 
tion]” (Cordelia obviously did not understand this phrase; it 
merely confused her, all the more since I gave it a false empha- 
sis, saying it with a sly look as if the point lay there) of a rumor 
“that I who am accustomed to live hidden from the world 
have become the subject of discussion inasmuch as they claim 
Iam engaged.” Cordelia obviously still lacked my interpreta- 
tion. I continued, “Shall I attribute it to my friends, since it is 
always regarded as a great good fortune to have fallen in love” 
(she was startled); “to my enemies, since it must always be re- 
garded as extremely ludicrous if this good fortune fell to my 
lot” (a countermove); ‘or to chance, since there is no founda- 
tion to it at all; or to the generatio aequivoca of the rumor, since 
the whole thing must have originated in an empty mind’s 


The Seducer’s Diary 371 


thoughtless association with itself.’’ With feminine curiosity, 
the aunt hastened to find out the identity of this woman to 
whom rumor had been pleased to engage me. | parried every 
question along that line. The whole story made an impression 
on Cordelia; I almost believe that Edward’s stock went up a 
few points. 


The crucial moment is approaching. I could communicate 
with the aunt in writing and ask for Cordelia’s hand. After all, 
that is the usual procedure in affairs of the heart, as if it were 
more natural for the heart to write than to speak. The very 
philistinism of such a move just might make me decide to do 
it. If I choose it, I lose the real surprise, and that I cannot relin- 
quish. —If I had a friend, he would perhaps say to me: Have 
you pondered well this very serious step you are taking, a step 
that is crucial to all the rest of your life and to another crea- 
ture’s happiness. This is the advantage of having a friend. I 
have no friend; whether this is an advantage I shall leave un- 
decided, but I regard being free from his advice as an absolute 
advantage. As for the rest, I have certainly thought through 
the whole matter in the strictest sense of the word. 

On my side there is nothing to hinder the engagement now. 
So I go a’courting; who would think it to look at me? Soon my 
insignificant person will be seen from a higher point of view. I 
shall cease to be a person and become—a match—yes, a good 
match, the aunt will say. The one I almost feel most sorry for 
is the aunt, for she loves me with such a pure and upright 
agronomical love; she almost worships me as her ideal. 


Now, I have made many declarations of love in my life, and 
yet here all my experience is of no help at all, for this declara- 
tion must be made in an altogether distinctive way. Primarily 
what I must drum into myself is that the whole thing is merely 
a simulated move. I have practiced various steps to see what 
the best approach might be. To make the moment erotic 
would be dubious, since this might easily anticipate what 
should come later and sequentially unfold. To make it very 
earnest is dangerous—for a young girl, such a moment is of 
such great significance that her whole soul can be concentrated 


340 


341 


372 Either/Or, I 


in it, just as a dying person is concentrated in his last wish. To 
make it hearty, low comedy would not be in harmony with 
the mask I have used up to now or with the new one I intend 
to put on and wear. To make it witty and ironic is too great a 
risk. If my principal concern, as it commonly is for most peo- 
ple in such a situation, were to lure forth the little “Yes,” then 
it would be as easy as falling off a log. To be sure, this is of 
importance to me, but not of absolute importance, for even 
though I reserved this girl for myself, even though I have de- 
voted considerable attention, indeed, all my interest, to her, 
there nevertheless are conditions under which I would not ac- 
cept her “Yes.” I do not care at all to possess the girl in the ex- 
ternal sense but wish to enjoy her artistically. Therefore the 
beginning must be as artistic as possible. The beginning must 
be as nebulous as possible; it must be an omnipossibility. If she 
promptly sees a deceiver in me, then she misunderstands me, 
for I am no deceiver in the ordinary sense; if she sees a faithful 
lover in me, then she also misunderstands me. It is a matter of 
having her soul be determined as little as possible by this epi- 
sode. At such a moment, a girl’s soul is as prophetic as a dying 
person’s.'° This must be prevented. My dear Cordelia! Iam 
defrauding you of something beautiful, but it cannot be other- 
wise, and I shall give you all the compensation I can. The 
whole episode must be kept as insignificant as possible, so that 
when she has given her consent she will be unable to throw 
any light whatever on what may be concealed in this situation. 
It is precisely this infinite possibility that is the interesting. If 
she is able to predict anything, then I have gone about it the 
wrong way and the whole relationship loses significance. That 
she would give her consent because she loves me is unthink- 
able, for !'she does not love me at all. The best thing to do is to 
transform the engagement from an act to an event, from 
something she does to something that happens to her, some- 
thing about which she is compelled to say: God alone knows 
how it really came about. 


The thirty-first 
Today I wrote a love letter for a third party. For me that is 
always a great pleasure. In the first place, it is always very in- 


The Seducer’s Diary 373 


teresting to place myself so vividly into the situation, and yet 
in complete comfort. I fill my pipe and hear about the relation- 
ship; the letters from the other party are submitted. How a 
young girl writes is always a very important subject to me! He 
sits there head over heels in love like a rat in cheese; he reads 
her letters aloud, interrupted by my laconic comments: She 
writes very well; she has feeling, taste, prudence; she has cer- 
tainly been in love before etc. In the second place, what I am 
doing is a good deed. I am helping a couple of young people to 
come together; now I am settling the account. For every happy 
couple, I select a victim for myself; I make two people happy, 
at most only one unhappy. I am honest and reliable, have 
never deceived anyone who has confided in me. It goes with- 
out saying that there is always a little joking, but that, after all, 
is a legitimate perquisite. 1°*And why do I enjoy this confi- 
dence? Because I know Latin and do my homework, and be- 
cause I always keep my little stories to myself. And do I not 
deserve this confidence? After all, I never abuse it. 


August 2 

106The moment had arrived. I caught a glimpse of the aunt 
on the street and thus knew that she was not at home. Edward 
was at the customhouse. In all likelihood, Cordelia was home 
alone. And so she was. She was sitting at the sewing table busy 
with some handiwork. Rarely did I visit the family in the 
morning; therefore, she was a little flustered at seeing me. The 
situation became almost too emotional. She was not to blame 
for that, for she regained her composure rather easily, but I 
myself was at fault, for despite my armor plating, she made an 
unusually powerful impression upon me. How lovely she was 
in her plain, blue-striped calico housedress, with a freshly 
picked rose on her bosom. A freshly picked rose—no, the girl 
herself was like a freshly picked blossom, so fresh was she, so 
recently arrived! Indeed, who knows where a young girl 
spends the night—in the land of illusions, I believe—but every 
morning she returns, and this explains her youthful freshness. 
She looked so young and yet so fully developed, as if nature, 
like a tender and luxuriant mother, had this very moment re- 
leased her from her hand. To me it was as if I were a witness to 


342 


343 


374 Either/Or, I 


this farewell scene; I saw how that fond mother embraced her 
once again in farewell, and I heard her say, “‘Go out into the 
world now, my child; I have done everything for you. Take 
now this kiss as a seal upon your lips. It is a seal that guards the 
sanctuary; it cannot be broken by anyone if you yourself do 
not want it to be, but when the right one comes you will know 
him.” And she pressed a kiss upon her lips, a kiss, unlike a hu- 
man kiss, which subtracts something, but rather a divine kiss, 
which gives everything, which gives the girl the power of the 
kiss. Wonderful nature, how profound and enigmatic you are! 
To man you give words, and to the girl the eloquence of the 
kiss! This kiss was upon her lips, and the farewell upon her 
brow, and the joyous greeting in her eyes—therefore she si- 
multaneously looked so much at home, for she was the child 
of the house, and so much the stranger, for she did not know 
the world but only the fond mother who invisibly watched 
over her. She was truly lovely, young as a child, and yet 
adorned with the noble-minded virginal dignity that inspires 
respect. 

Soon, however, I was dispassionate again and solemnly ob- 
tuse, as is befitting when one is about to cause something full 
of meaning to happen in such a way as to make it mean noth- 
ing. After a few general remarks, | drew a bit closer to her and 
came out with my petition. A person who talks like a book is 
extremely boring to listen to, but sometimes it is rather expe- 
dient to talk that way. '*That is, a book has the remarkable 
characteristic that it can be interpreted as one pleases. Ifa per- 
son talks like a book, his talking also has the same character- 
istic. | kept very strictly to the usual formulas. '°She was sur- 
prised, as I had expected; that is undeniable. It is difficult for 
me to give an account of how she looked. Her expression was 
multifarious—indeed, just about like the still unpublished but 
announced commentary on my book, a commentary that con- 
tains the possibility of any and every interpretation. One 
word, and she would have laughed at me; one word, she 
would have been moved; one word, she would have escaped 
me—but no word passed my lips; I remained solemnly obtuse 
and kept precisely to the ritual. —“‘She had known me for such 


The Seducer’s Diary 375 


a short time.’’ Good lord, such difficulties are encountered 
only on the narrow path of an engagement, not on the flowery 
path of love. 

Very strange. When I was deliberating on the matter during 
the preceding days, I was resolute enough about it and sure 
that in her surprise she would say “‘Yes.”’ There one sees how 
much all the preparations help; the matter did not turn out that 
way, for she said neither ‘“‘Yes”’ nor “‘No”’ but referred me to 
her aunt. I should have foreseen that. But luck was actually 
with me, for this result was even better. 


The aunt gives her consent; of that I have never entertained 
the remotest doubt. Cordelia follows her advice. As for my 
engagement, I shall not boast that it is poetic, for in every way 
it is utterly philistine and bourgeois. The girl does not know 
whether she should say “Yes” or ‘‘No’’; the aunt says ‘‘Yes,” 
the girl also says ‘‘Yes,” I take the girl, she takes me—and now 
the story begins. 


The third 

106So now Iam engaged; so is Cordelia, and that is just about 
all she knows concerning the whole affair. If she had a girl 
friend to whom she would talk honestly, she would very 
likely say, “What it all means, I really do not understand. 
There is something about him that draws me to him, but I can- 
not make out what it is. He has a strange power over me, but 
love him, that I do not and perhaps never shall, but I shall 
surely be able to endure living with him and thus also be quite 
happy with him, for he will probably not demand too much if 
one only sticks it out with him.”” My dear Cordelia! Perhaps 
he will require something more, and in return less endurance. 
—Of all ludicrous things an engagement is still the most ludi- 
crous. '’There is at least meaning in a marriage, even if this 
meaning does not suit me. An engagement is a purely human 
invention and is no credit whatsoever to its inventor. It is nei- 
ther one thing nor the other and has as much to do with love 
as the ribbon the beadle wears down his back has to do with a 
professor’s academic gown. Now I am a member of this re- 


344 


1 
345 


376 Either/Or, I 


spectable society. 'It is not without significance, for as Trop 
says: Not until you become an artist yourself do you earn the 
right to judge other artists.'°? And is not an engaged man also 
a Dyrehaug artist?1!° 

Edward is beside himself with indignation. He is letting his 
beard grow, has hung up his black suit—which tells much. He 
wants to speak with Cordelia, wants to describe for her all my 
cunning. It will be a shocking scene: Edward unshaven, di- 
sheveled, and speaking loudly with Cordelia. If he will only 
not dislodge me with his long beard. I try futilely to bring him 
to reason; I explain that it is the aunt who arranged the match, 
that Cordelia perhaps still entertains feelings for him, that I 
shall be willing to bow out if he can win her. '!'For a moment, 
he hesitates about whether he should have his beard trimmed 
a new way, buy a new black suit—the next moment, he heaps 
abuse upon me. I do everything to keep up appearances with 
him. However angry he is with me, I am sure he will take no 
step without consulting me; he does not forget what benefit he 
has had from me as his mentor. And why should I tear his last 
hope from him, why break with him? He is a good man; who 
knows what may happen in time. 


What I have to do now is, on the one hand, to organize 
everything so that the engagement is broken in such a way that 
I thereby secure a more beautiful and significant relationship to 
Cordelia; on the other hand, I must utilize the time to the best 
of my ability to delight in the loveliness, all the lovableness, 
with which nature has so abundantly equipped her, delight in 
it, but nevertheless with the restraint and circumspection that 
forestall the anticipation of anything. When I have brought her 
to the point where she has learned what it is to love and what 
it is to love me, then the engagement will break like a defective 
mold and she will belong to me. Others become engaged 
when they have arrived at this point and have the good pros- 
pect of a boring marriage for all eternity. That is their busi- 
ness. 

Everything is still in statu quo, but scarcely any engaged per- 
son can be happier than I; no miser who has found a gold coin 


The Seducer’s Diary 377 


is happier than I. I am intoxicated with the thought that she is 
in my power. Pure, innocent womanliness, as transparent as 
the sea, and yet just as deep, with no idea of love [Kjerlighed]! 
But now she is going to learn what a powerful force erotic love 
[Elskov} is. Just like a king’s daughter who has been elevated 
from the dust to the throne of her forefathers, so she will be 
enthroned in the kingdom to which she belongs. And this will 
take place through me; and in learning to love, she will learn 
to love me; as she develops the rule, the paradigm will sequen- 
tially unfold, and this 1am. As she in love becomes alive to her 
entire meaning, she will apply this to loving me, and when she 
suspects that she has learned it from me, she will love me two- 
fold. The thought of my joy overwhelms me to such a degree 
that I am almost losing my senses. 

Her soul is not diffused or slackened by the vague emotions 
of erotic love, something that keeps many young girls from 
ever learning to love, that is, definitely, energetically, totally. 
In their minds they have a vague, foggy image that is supposed 
to be an ideal by which the actual object is to be tested. From 
such incompleteness emerges a something whereby one may 
help oneself properly through the world. —As erotic love now 
awakens in her soul, I see into it, I learn to know it by listening 
to all the voices of erotic love in her. I make sure of the shape 
it has taken in her and form myself in likeness to it; and just as 
I already am spontaneously included in the story that love is 
running through in her heart, so I come again to her from the 
outside as deceptively as possible. After all, a girl loves only 
once. 


Now, then, I am in legitimate possession of Cordelia and 
have the aunt’s consent and blessing, the congratulations of 
friends and relatives; surely it will last. So now the troubles of 
war are over and the blessings of peace begin. What foolish- 
ness! As if the aunt’s blessing and the friends’ congratulations 
were able to give me possession of Cordelia in the more pro- 
found sense; as if love made such a distinction between times 
of war and times of peace and did not instead—as long as it ex- 
ists—announce itself in conflict, even though the weapons are 


346 


378 Either/Or, I 


different. The difference is actually in whether the conflict is 
cominus [close at hand] or eminus [at a distance]. The more the 
conflict in a love relationship has been eminus, the more dis- 
tressing it is, for the hand-to-hand combat becomes all the 
more trifling. Hand-to-hand combat involves a handshake, a 
touching with the foot—something that Ovid,!'? as is known, 
recommends just as much as he most jealously rants against it, 
to say nothing of a kiss, an embrace. The person who fights 
eminus usually has only the eyes''? on which to depend, and 
yet, if he is an artist, he knows how to use this weapon with 
such virtuosity that he achieves almost the same result. He can 
let his eyes rest on a girl with a desultory tenderness that has 
the same effect as if he casually touched her; he can grasp her 
just as firmly with his eyes as if he held her locked in his arms. 
But it is always a mistake or a disaster if one fights eminus too 
long, for such fighting is always only a symbol, not the enjoy- 
ment. Not until one fights cominus does everything acquire its 
true meaning. If there is no combat in love, then it has ceased. 
I have almost never fought eminus, and this is why Iam now 
not at the end but at the beginning; I am taking out my weap- 
ons. I am in possession of her, that is true, that is, in the legal 
and bourgeois sense, but that means nothing at all to me—I 
have much purer concepts. She is engaged to me, that is true, 
but if from that I were to draw the conclusion that she loves 
me, it would be an illusion, for she does not love at all. am in 
legitimate possession of her, and yet I am not in possession of 
her, just as I can very well be in possession of a girl without 
being in legitimate possession of her. 


Auf heimlich errothender Wange 
Leuchtet des Herzens Gliihen 

[On a secretly blushing cheek 
Shines the glow of the heart].'"4 


She is sitting on the sofa by the tea table, I on a chair at her 
side. This position has a confidentiality and yet a dignity that 
distances. A great deal depends upon the position, that is, for 
one who has an eye for it. Love has many positions—this is the 
first. How royally nature has equipped this girl: her clean soft 


The Seducer’s Diary 379 


figure, her profoundly feminine innocence, her clear eyes—all 
this intoxicates me. —I have greeted her. She approached me, 
happy as usual, yet a little embarrassed, a little uncertain— 
after all, the engagement must make our relationship some- 
what different, but how, she does not know; she took my 
hand, but not with the usual smile. I responded to the greeting 
with a slight, almost unnoticeable pressure of the hand; I was 
gentle and friendly, yet without being erotic. —She is sitting 
on the sofa by the tea table, J on a chair at her side. A transfig- 
uring ceremoniousness sweeps over the scene, a soft morning 
light. She is silent; nothing breaks in upon the stillness. My 
eyes glide softly over her, not desiringly—that would truly be 
brazen. A delicate fleeting blush, like a cloud over the 
meadow, fades away, heightening and fading. What does this 
blush signify? Is it love, is it longing, hope, fear, for is not red 
the color of the heart? By no means. She wonders, she really 
wonders—not at me, for that would be too little to offer her; 
she is amazed—not at herself but within herself. She is being 
transformed within herself. This moment craves stillness; 
therefore no reflection is to disturb it, no noise of passion is to 
disrupt it. It is as if | were not present, and yet it is my very 
presence that is the condition for this contemplative wonder of 
hers. My being is in harmony with hers. In a state such as this, 
a girl is adored and worshiped, just as some deities are, by si- 
lence.!"5 

Nett is fortunate that I have my uncle’s house. If I wanted to 
impart to a young man a distaste for tobacco, I would take 
him into some smoking room or other in Regensen;'!7 if I 
want to impart to a young girl a distaste for being engaged, I 
need only to introduce her here. Just as no one but tailors fre- 
quents the tailors’ guildhall, so here only engaged couples 
come. It is an appalling company in which to become in- 
volved, and I cannot blame Cordelia for becoming impatient. 
When we are gathered en masse, I think we put ten couples on 
the field, besides the annexed battalions that come to the cap- 
ital for the great festivals. Then we engaged ones really enjoy 
the delights of being engaged. !!*] report with Cordelia at the 
assembly ground in order to give her a distaste for these amo- 


347 


348 


380 Etther/Or, I 


rous tangibilities, these bunglings of lovesick workmen. 
9Incessantly, all night through, one hears a sound as if some- 
one were going around with a fly swatter—it is the lovers’ 
kissing. In this house, one has an amiable absence of embar- 
rassment; one does not even seek the nooks and corners—no, 
people sit around a large round table. I, too, make a move to 
treat Cordelia in the same way. To that end, I really have to 
force myself. It would really be shocking if I allowed myself to 
insult her deep womanliness in this way. I would reproach 
myself even more for this than when I deceive her. On the 
whole, I can guarantee perfect esthetic treatment to any girl 
who entrusts herself to me—it only ends with her being de- 
ceived, but this, too, is part of my esthetics, for either the girl 
deceives the man or the man deceives the girl. ?°It would cer- 
tainly be interesting if some literary drudge could be found to 
count up in fairy tales, legends, folk ballads, and myths 
whether a girl is more often faithless or a man. 

Repent of the time Cordelia is costing me, I do not, even 
though she is costing me a great deal. Each meeting often re- 
quires long preparations. Iam experiencing with her the emer- 
gence of her love. I myself am almost invisibly present when I 
am sitting visible at her side. My relationship to her is like a 
dance that is supposed to be danced by two people but is 
danced by only one. That is, I am the other dancer, but invis- 
ible. She moves as in a dream, and yet she is dancing with an- 
other, and I am that other one who, insofar as I am visibly 
present, is invisible, and insofar as I am invisible, is visible. 
The movements require another. She bows to him; she 
stretches out her hand to him. She recedes; she approaches 
again. I take her hand; I complete her thought, which never- 
theless is completed within itself. She moves to the melody in 
her own soul; I am merely the occasion for her moving. Iam 
not erotic; that would only arouse her; I am flexible, supple, 
impersonal, almost like a mood. !?! 


What do engaged people ordinarily talk about? As far as I 
know, they are very busy mutually weaving each other into 
the boring context of the respective families. No wonder the 


The Seducer’s Diary 381 


erotic vanishes. If a person does not know how to make erotic 
love the absolute, in comparison with which all other events 
vanish, then he should never let himself become involved in 
loving, even if he marries ten times. Whether I have an aunt 
named Marianne, an uncle named Christopher, a father who is 
a major, etc. etc., all such public information is irrelevant to 
the mysteries of love. Yes, even one’s own past life is nothing. 
Ordinarily a young girl does not have much to tell in this re- 
gard; if she does, it may very well be worth the trouble to lis- 
ten to her—but, as a rule, not to love her. !”I for my part am 
not looking for stories—I certainly have enough of them; lam 
seeking immediacy. The eternal in erotic love is that '*in its 
moment individuals first come into existence for each other. 


A little confidence must be awakened in her, or, more cor- 
rectly, a doubt must be removed. I do not exactly belong to 
the aggregate of lovers who out of respect love each other, out 
of respect marry each other, out of respect have children to- 
gether, but nevertheless I am well aware that erotic love, es- 
pecially as long as passion is not set in motion, demands of the 
one who is its object that he not esthetically offend against mo- 
rality. In this regard, erotic love has its own dialectic. For ex- 
ample, while my relationship with Edward is far more censur- 
able from the moral standpoint than my conduct toward the 
aunt, it will be much easier to justify the former to Cordelia 
than the latter. It is true that she has not said anything about it, 
but nevertheless I found it best to explain the necessity of my 
acting in that way. The cautiousness I have used flatters her 
pride; the secretiveness with which I handled everything cap- 
tures her attention. Surely it might seem that here I have al- 
ready betrayed too much erotic polish, so that when I am 
obliged later to insinuate that I have never been in love before 
I shall be contradicting myself, but that makes no difference. I 
am not afraid of contradicting myself if only she does not de- 
tect it and I achieve what I wish. Let it be the ambition of 
learned doctoral candidates to avoid every contradiction; a 
young girl’s life is too abundant to have no contradictions and 
consequently makes contradictions inevitable. 


349 


350 


382 Either/Or, I 


She is proud and also has no real conception of the erotic. 
Although now she probably submits to me intellectually to 
some degree, it is conceivable that when the erotic begins to 
assert itself she might take it into her head to turn her pride 
against me. From all that I can observe, she is perplexed about 
woman’s real significance. Therefore it was easy to arouse her 
pride against Edward. But this pride was completely eccen- 
tric, because she had no conception of erotic love. If she ac- 
quires it, then she will acquire her true pride, but a remnant of 
that eccentric pride might easily supervene. It is then conceiv- 
able that she would turn against me. Although she will not re- 
pent of having consented to the engagement, she will never- 
theless readily perceive that I obtained it at a rather good price; 
she will see that the beginning was not made correctly from 
her side. If this dawns on her, she will dare to stand up to me. 
Good! Then I shall be convinced of how profoundly she is 
stirred. 


Sure enough. Even from far down the street, I see this 
lovely little curly head leaning out of the window as far as pos- 
sible. It is the third day I have noticed it. —A young girl cer- 
tainly does not stand at the window for nothing; presumably 
she has her good reasons. —But I beg you for heaven’s sake 
not to lean so far out of the window; I wager that you are 
standing on the rung of a chair—I can tell from your posture. 
Think how terrible it would be if you fell down, not on my 
head, because I am keeping out of this affair until later, but on 
his, his, because there certainly must be a he. —No! What do I 
see! Way off there, my friend Hansen, the licentiate, is coming 
down the middle of the street. There is something unusual 
about his behavior. It is a rather uncustomary conveyance; if I 
judge rightly, it is on the wings of longing that he is coming. 
Could it be that he is a regular visitor to the house and I do not 
know it? —My pretty little miss, you disappear; I suppose you 
have gone to open the door to receive him. —You can just as 
well come back; he is not coming into the house at all. —How 
can it be that you know better? Well, I can assure you—he said 
it himself. If the carriage that passed had not made so much 


The Seducer’s Diary 383 


noise, you yourself could have heard it. I said, just en passant: 
Are you going in here? To which he answered with a clear 
word: No. —So you may as well say good-bye, for the licen- 
tiate and I are going out for a walk. He is embarrassed, and 
embarrassed people generally are talkative. I am going to talk 
with him about the pastoral appointment he is seeking. — 
Good-bye, my pretty miss, we are on our way to the custom- 
house. When we arrive there, I shall say to him: What a 
damned nuisance—you have taken me out of my way. I am 
supposed to go to Vestergade. 

Look, here we are again. —What constancy! She is still 
standing at the window. A girl like that is sure to make a man 
happy. —And why am I doing all this, you ask. Because I am 
a vile fellow who has his fun by teasing others? By no means. 
lam doing it out of consideration for you, my charming girl. 
In the first place, you have been waiting for this licentiate, 
longing for him, and thus he is doubly handsome when he 
comes. In the second place, when he comes through the door 
now, he will say, ‘““We damned near let the cat out of the bag 
when that confounded fellow was at the door as I was about to 
visit you. But I was smart; I inveigled him into a long chat 
about the appointment I am seeking; I walked him here and 
there and finally way out to the customhouse. I assure you that 
he did not notice a thing.’’ And what then? !4So you are fon- 
der of your licentiate than ever, for you have always thought 
that he had an excellent way of thinking, but that he was 
clever—well, now you see it for yourself. And you have me to 
thank for that. —But something occurs to me. Their engage- 
ment must not have been announced yet—otherwise I would 
know about it. The girl is lovely and delightful to look at, but 
she is young. Perhaps her discernment is not mature yet. Was 
it not conceivable that she would go and rashly take a most se- 
rious step? That must be prevented; I must speak with her. I 
owe it to her, for she certainly is a very charming girl. I owe it 
to the licentiate, for he is my friend; as far as that goes, I owe 
it to her because she is my friend’s intended. I owe it to the 
family, for certainly it is a very respectable family. 11 owe it 
to the whole human race, for it is a good deed. The whole hu- 


I 
351 


352 


384 Either/Or, I 


man race! What a tremendous thought, what uplifting sport— 
to act in the name of the whole human race, to be in possession 
of a general power of attorney. —But now to Cordelia. I can 
always make use of mood, and the girl’s beautiful longing has 
really stirred me. 


So now begins the first war with Cordelia, in which I retreat 
and thereby teach her to be victorious as she pursues me. I con- 
tinually fall back, and in this backward movement I teach her 
to know through me all the powers of erotic love, its turbulent 
thoughts, its passion, what longing is, and hope, and impa- 
tient expectancy. As I perform this set of steps before her, all 
this will develop correspondingly in her. It is a triumphal 
procession in which I am leading her, and I myself am just as 
much the one who dithyrambically sings praises to her victory 
as I am the one who shows the way. She will gain courage to 
believe in erotic love, to believe it is an eternal force, when she 
sees its dominion over me, sees my movements. She will be- 
lieve me, partly because I rely on my artistry, and partly be- 
cause at the bottom of what I am doing there is truth. If that 
were not the case, she would not believe me. With my every 
move, she becomes stronger and stronger; love is awakening 
in her soul; she is being enthroned in her meaning as a woman. 

Until now I have not proposed [friet] to her, as it is called 
in the bourgeois sense; now I shall do it. I shall make her free 
[fri]; only in that way shall I love her. That she owes this to me, 
she must never suspect, for then she will lose her confidence in 
herself. Then when she feels free, so free that she is almost 
tempted to want to break with me, the second struggle will 
begin. Now she has power and passion, and the struggle has 
significance for me—let the momentary consequences be what 
they may. Suppose that in her pride she becomes giddy, sup- 
pose that she does break with me—all right!—she has her free- 
dom, but she will still belong to me. That the engagement 
should bind her is silly—I want to possess her only in her free- 
dom. Let her leave me—the second struggle is nevertheless be- 
ginning, and in this second struggle I shall be victorious as 
surely as it was an illusion that she was victorious in the first 


The Seducer’s Diary 385 


one. The greater the abundance of strength she has, the more 
interesting for me. The first war is a war of liberation; it is a 
game. The second is a war of conquest; it is a life-and-death 
struggle. 


Do I love Cordelia? Yes! Sincerely? Yes! Faithfully? Yes—in 
the esthetic sense, and surely this should mean something. 
What good would it have been if this girl had fallen into the 
hands of a clumsy oaf of a faithful husband? What would have 
become of her? Nothing. They say that it takes a bit more than 
honesty to make one’s way through the world. I would say 
that it takes a bit more than honesty to love such a girl. That 
more I do have—it is deceitfulness. And yet I do love her faith- 
fully. Strictly and abstinently, I keep watch on myself so that 
everything in her, the divinely rich nature in her may come to 
full development. I am one of the few who can do this, and she 
is one of the few qualified for it; so are we not suited to each 
other???” 


Is it sinful of me not to look at the pastor but instead fasten 
my eyes on the beautiful embroidered handkerchief you are 
holding in your hand? Is it sinful of you to hold it in just that 
way? —There is a name in the corner. Your name is Charlotte 
Hahn? It is so seductive to come to know a woman’s name in 
such an accidental way. It is as if there were an obliging spirit 
who secretly introduced me to you. Or perhaps it is not acci- 
dental that the handkerchief is folded in such a way that I am 
able to see the name? —You are moved, you wipe a tear from 
your eye. —The handkerchief is hanging loosely once again. 
—It seems strange to you that I am looking at you and not at 
the pastor. You look at the handkerchief and notice that it has 
betrayed your name. It is indeed a most innocent thing; one 
can easily find out a girl’s name. —Why must the handkerchief 
suffer? Why must it be crumpled up? Why become angry with 
it? Why become angry with me? What is that the pastor is say- 
ing: “Let no one lead a person into temptation. Even the per- 
son who does it unknowingly bears a responsibility; he, too, 
has a debt to the other that he can pay off only by increased 


353 


354 


386 Either/Or, I 


kindness.”” —Now he says Amen. Outside the door of the 
church, you will probably let the handkerchief fly loosely in 
the wind. —Or have you become afraid of me? What have I 
done? —Have I done more than you can forgive, than what 
you dare to remember—in order to forgive? 


A double-movement!” is necessary in relation to Cordelia. 
If I just keep on retreating before her superior force, it would 
be very possible that the erotic in her would become too dis- 
solute and lax for the deeper womanliness to be able to hypos- 
tatize itself. Then, when the second struggle begins, she would 
be unable to offer resistance. To be sure, she sleeps her way to 
victory, but she is supposed to do that; on the other hand she 
must continually be awakened. If for one moment she thinks 
her victory would in turn be wrested from her, she must learn 
to will to hold onto it tightly. Her womanliness will be ma- 
tured in this conflict. I could use either conversation to inflame 
her or letters to cool her off, or vice versa. The latter is pref- 
erable in every way. I then enjoy her most extreme moments. 
When she has received a letter, when its sweet poison has en- 
tered her blood, then a word is sufficient to make her love 
burst forth. At the next moment, irony and hoarfrost make 
her doubtful, but not so much that she nevertheless does not 
continually feel her victory, feel it augmented by the receipt of 
the next letter. Nor can irony be used very well ina letter with- 
out running the risk that she would not understand it. Only 
traces of ardor can be used in a conversation. My personal 
presence will prevent ecstasy. If ] am present only in a letter, 
then she can easily cope with me; to some extent, she mistakes 
me for a more universal creature who dwells in her love. 
Then, too, in a letter one can more readily have free rein; in a 
letter I can throw myself at her feet in superb fashion etc.— 
something that would easily seem like nonsense if I did it in 
person, and the illusion would be lost. The contradiction in 
these movements will evoke and develop, strengthen and con- 
solidate, the erotic love in her—in one word: tempt it. 

These letters, however, must not take on a strongly erotic 
color too soon. In the beginning, it is best that they bear a 


The Seducer’s Diary 387 


more universal stamp, contain a single clue, remove a single 
doubt. Occasionally they may suggest the advantage an en- 
gagement has, insofar as people can be deflected by mystifica- 
tions. Whatever drawbacks it has otherwise, she will not lack 
opportunities to become aware of them. '”In my uncle’s 
house I have a caricature that I can always place alongside. 
Without my help, she cannot produce the erotic inwardness. If 
I deny her this and let this burlesque image plague her, then she 
will surely become bored with being engaged, yet without 
really being aware that it is I who have made her bored with it. 

A little epistle today describing the state of my soul will give 
her a clue to her own inner state. It is the correct method, and 
method I do have. I have you to thank for that, you dear girls 
I have loved in the past. I owe it to you that my soul is so in 
tune that I can be what I wish for Cordelia. I recall you with 
thanks; the honor belongs to you. I shall always admit that a 
young girl is a born teacher from whom one can always 
learn—if nothing else, then to deceive her—for one learns that 
best from the girls themselves. No matter how old I become, 
I shall still never forget that it is all over for a man only when 
he has grown so old that he can learn nothing from a young 
girl. 


My Cordelia, 

You say that you had not imagined me like this, but neither 
did I imagine that I could become like this. Is not the change in 
you? For it is conceivable that I have not actually changed but 
that the eyes with which you look at me have changed. Or is 
the change in me? It is in me, for I love you; it is in you, for it 
is you I love. In the calm, cold light of the understanding, I 
considered everything. Proud and unmoved, I was terrified by 
nothing. Nothing surprised me; even if a ghost had knocked 
at the door, I would have calmly picked up the candelabrum'° 
and opened it. But see, it was not ghosts for whom I unlocked 
the door, not pale, feeble shapes—it was for you, my Cordelia; 
it was life and youth and health and beauty that approached 
me. My arm shakes; I cannot hold the light steady. I fall back 
from you, and yet I cannot keep from looking at you, cannot 


I 
355 


356 


388 Either/Or, I 


keep from wishing I could hold the light steady. Iam changed, 
but why, how, what is the nature of this change? I do not 
know; I know of no more explicit definition to add, no richer 
predicate to use than this when I altogether enigmatically say 
of myself: I have changed. '! 


Your JOHANNES 


82M y Cordelia, 

Erotic love loves secrecy—an engagement is a disclosure; it 
loves silence—an engagement is a public announcement; it 
loves whispering—an engagement is a loud proclamation, and 
yet, with my Cordelia’s help, an engagement will be a superb 
way to deceive the enemies. On a dark night, there is nothing 
more dangerous for other ships than to hang out a lantern, 
which is more deceptive than the darkness. 1% 


Your JOHANNES 


'34She is sitting on the sofa by the tea table; 1 am sitting at her 
side. She is holding my arm; her head, heavy with many 
thoughts, is resting on my shoulder. She is so near and yet still 
so far; she is devoted to me, and yet she does not belong to me. 
There is still some resistance, but it is not subjectively re- 
flected; it is the common resistance of womanliness, for wom- 
an’s essence is a devotedness that takes the form of resistance. 
—She is sitting on the sofa by the tea table; I am sitting at her 
side. Her heart is beating, but without passion; her bosom 
rises and falls, but not in agitation; at times her color changes, 
but with soft shading. Is it love? By no means. She listens; she 
understands. She listens to the familiar saying; she understands 
it. She listens to another person’s talking; she understands it as 
her own. She listens to another person’s voice as it resonates 
within her; she understands this resonance as if it were her own 
voice that discloses to her and to another. 


What am I doing? Am I beguiling her? By no means—that 
would be of no avail to me. Am I stealing her heart? By no 
means—1in fact, I prefer that the girl I am going to love should 
keep her heart. What am I doing, then? I am shaping for my- 


The Seducer’s Diary 389 


self a heart like unto hers. An artist paints his beloved; that is 
now his joy; a sculptor shapes her. This I, too, am doing, but 
in an intellectual sense. She does not know that I possess this 
image and therein really lies my falsification. I obtained it se- 
cretively, and in that sense I have stolen her heart, just as it is 
told of Rebecca that she stole Laban’s heart when she took his 
household gods away from him in a cunning manner. '5 


Surroundings and setting do have a great influence upon a 
person and are part of that which makes a firm and deep 
impression on the memory [Hukommelse] or, more correctly, 
on the whole soul, and for this reason cannot be forgotten 
either. No matter how old I may become, it will nevertheless 
always be impossible for me to think of Cordelia in surround- 
ings other than this little room. When I come to visit her, the 
maid usually lets me in by the door to the large drawing room; 
Cordelia herself enters from her room, and as I open the door 
to enter the small drawing room, she opens the other door, so 
that our eyes meet in the doorway. This drawing room is 
small, cozy, is almost the size of a private room. Although I 
have now seen it from many different angles, | am most fond 
of seeing it from the sofa. She sits there at my side; before us 
stands a round tea table, over which a tablecloth is spread in 
rich folds. On the table stands a lamp shaped in the form of a 
flower, which rises up vigorously and copiously to bear its 
crown, over which in turn hangs a delicately cut veil of paper, 
so light that it cannot remain still. The form of the lamp is 
reminiscent of the Orient, the movement of the veil reminis- 
cent of the gentle breezes in that region. The floor is covered 
by matting woven ofa special kind of willow, a work that im- 
mediately betrays its foreign origin. 

At moments, I let the lamp be the motif in my landscape. I 
sit with her then, stretched out on the ground under the flower 
of the lamp. At other times, I let the willow matting call up the 
image of a ship, of an officer’s stateroom—we are sailing out 
in the middle of the great ocean. When we are sitting far from 
the window, we look directly into the sweeping horizon of the 
sky. This, too, augments the illusion. When J am sitting at her 


I 
357 


I 
358 


390 Either/Or, I 


side, I let such things appear like an image that hastens as elu- 
sively over actuality as death crosses a person’s grave. 

The surroundings are always of great importance, especially 
for the sake of recollection [Erindring].!°° Every erotic relation- 
ship must always be lived through in such a way that it is easy 
for one to produce an image that conveys all the beauty of it. 
To be able to do this successfully, one must be attentive to the 
surroundings. If they are not found to be as desired, then they 
must be made so. For Cordelia and her love, the surroundings 
are entirely appropriate. But what a different image presents 
itself to me when I think of my little Emily, and yet, again, 
were not the surroundings appropriate? I cannot imagine her 
or, more correctly, I want to recall her only in the little room 
opening onto the garden. The doors stood open; a little garden 
in front of the house cut off the view, compelled the eyes to be 
arrested there, to stop before boldly following the road that 
vanished into the distance. Emily was lovely but of less signif- 
icance than Cordelia. The surroundings were also designed for 
that. The eyes remained earthbound, did not rush boldly and 
impatiently ahead, rested on that little foreground. The road 
itself, even though it romantically wandered off into the dis- 
tance, had no other effect than that the eyes glanced over the 
stretch before it and then returned home in order to glance 
over the same stretch again. The room was earthbound. Cor- 
delia’s surroundings must have no foreground but rather the 
infinite boldness of the horizon. She must not be earthbound 
but must float, not walk but fly, not back and forth but eter- 
nally forward. 


'37When a person himself becomes engaged, he is at once ef- 
fectually initiated into the antics of the engaged. Some days 
ago, licentiate Hansen showed up with the charming young 
girl to whom he has become engaged. He confided to me that 
she was lovely, which I knew before, that she was very young, 
which I also knew; he finally confided to me that he had chosen 
her precisely so that he himself could form her into the ideal 
that had always vaguely hovered before him. Good lord, what 
a silly licentiate—and a healthy, blooming, cheerful girl. 


The Seducer’s Diary 391 


Now, I am a fairly old hand at the game, and yet I never ap- 
proach a young girl other than as nature’s Venerabile [some- 
thing worthy of veneration] and first learn from her. Then in- 
sofar as | may have any formative influence upon her, it is by 
teaching her again and again what I have learned from her. 


Her soul must be stirred, agitated in every possible direc- 
tion—not piecemeal and by spurts, but totally. She must dis- 
cover the infinite, must experience that this is what lies closest 
to a person. This she must discover not along the path of 
thought, which for her is a wrong way, but i1 the imagina- 
tion, which is the real line of communication between her and 
me, for that which is a component for the man is the whole for 
the woman. She must not labor her way forward to the infinite 
along the irksome path of thought, for woman is not born to 
labor, but she will reach it along the easy path of the imagina- 
tion and the heart. For a young girl, the infinite is just as nat- 
ural as the idea that all love must be happy. Everywhere, 
wherever she turns, a young girl has the infinite around her, 
and the transition is a leap,'*8 but, please note, a feminine, not 
a masculine, leap. Why are men ordinarily so clumsy? When 
they are going to leap, they have to take a running start, make 
many preparations, measure the distance with the eyes, make 
several runs—shy away and turn back. Finally they leap and 
fall in. A young girl leaps in a different way. In mountainous 
country, one often comes upon two towering mountain 
peaks. A chasmic abyss separates them, terrible to look down 
into. No man dares to risk this leap. But a young girl, so say 
the natives in the region, did dare to do it, and it is called the 
Maiden’s Leap. I am fully prepared to believe it, just as I be- 
lieve everything remarkable about a young girl, and it is intox- 
icating to me to hear the simple natives talk about it. I believe 
it all, believe the marvelous, am amazed by it only in order to 
believe; as the only thing that has amazed me in the world, a 
young girl is the first and will be the last. And yet for a young 
girl such a leap is only a hop, whereas a man’s leap always be- 
comes ludicrous because no matter how far he stretches out, 
his exertion at the same time becomes minuscule compared 


359 


392 Either/Or, I 


with the distance between the peaks and nevertheless provides 
a kind of yardstick. But who would be so foolish as to imagine 
a young girl taking a running start? One can certainly imagine 
her running, but this running is itself a game, an enjoyment, a 
display of her loveliness, whereas the idea of a running start 
separates what in woman belongs together; that is, a running 
start has in itself the dialectical, which is contrary to woman’s 
nature. And now the leap—who again would be graceless 
enough here to dare to separate what belongs together! Her 
leap is a gliding. And once she has reached the other side, she 
stands there again, not exhausted by the effort, but more beau- 
tiful, more soulful than ever; she throws a kiss over to us who 
stand on this side. Young, newborn, like a flower that has shot 
up from the root of the mountain, she swings out over the 
abyss so that everything almost goes black before our eyes. — 
What she must learn is to 'make all the motions of infinity, to 
swing herself, to rock herself in moods, to confuse poetry and 
actuality, truth and fiction, to frolic in infinity. Then when she 
is familiar with this tumult, I shall add the erotic; then she will 
be what I want and desire. Then my duties will be over, my 
work; then I shall haul in all my sails; then I shall sit at her side, 
and under her sails we shall journey forward. In fact, as soon 
as this girl is erotically intoxicated, I shall have enough to do 
sitting at the helm in order to moderate the speed so that noth- 
ing happens too soon or in an unbecoming manner. Once in a 
while one punctures a little hole in the sail, and the next mo- 
ment we rush along again. 

13°In my uncle’s house, Cordelia becomes more and more 
indignant. She has requested several times that we do not go 
there anymore, but it is to no avail; I always know how to 
think up evasions. When we were leaving there last night, 
she shook my hand with an unusual passion. She probably has 
really felt very distressed there, and no wonder. If I did not al- 
ways find amusement in observing these unnatural affecta- 
tions, I could not possibly hold out. This morning, I received 
a letter from her in which she makes fun of engagements 
with more wit than J had given her credit for. I kissed the let- 


The Seducer’s Diary 393 


ter; it is the most cherished one I have received from her. Just 
right, my Cordelia! That is the way I want it. 


'40It so happens, rather oddly, that on Ostergade there are 
two coffee shops directly opposite each other. On the second 
floor, left side, lives a young miss or a young lady. Usually, 
she is concealed behind a vertical venetian blind covering the 
window by which she sits. The blind is made of very thin ma- 
terial, and anyone, if he has good eyes, who knows the girl or 
has seen her frequently will easily be able to identify every fea- 
ture, whereas to the person who does not know her and does 
not have good eyes she will appear as a dark figure. In some 
measure, the latter is the case with me; the former with a 
young officer who every day, precisely at twelve o’clock, 
shows up in the offing and turns his gaze up toward that vene- 
tian blind. Actually it was the venetian blind that first directed 
my attention to that fine telegraphic connection. There are no 
blinds on the other windows, and a solitary blind such as that, 
covering only one window, is usually a sign that someone sits 
behind it regularly. 

One morning, I stood in the window of the pastry shop on 
the other side. It was exactly twelve o’clock. Paying no atten- 
tion to the people passing by, I kept my eyes on that venetian 
blind, when suddenly the dark figure behind it began to move. 
The profile of a woman’s head appeared in the next window in 
such a way that it turned in a strange manner in the same di- 
rection as the venetian blind. Thereupon the owner of the head 
nodded in a very friendly way and again hid behind the vene- 
tian blind. I concluded first and foremost that the person she 
greeted was a man, for her gesture was too passionate to be 
prompted by the sight of a girl friend; second, I concluded that 
the one to whom the greeting applied ordinarily came from 
the other side. She had placed herself just right in order to be 
able to see him some distance away, in fact, hidden by the 
venetian blind, she could even greet him. —Quite so! At pre- 
cisely twelve o’clock, the hero in this little love episode, our 
dear lieutenant, comes along. I am sitting in the coffee shop on 
the ground floor of the building in which the young lady lives 


361 


394 Either/Or, I 


on the second floor. The lieutenant has already spied her. Be 
careful, my good friend; it is not such an easy matter to pay 
one’s respects gracefully to the second floor. Incidentally, he is 
not bad—slender, well built, a handsome figure, a curved 
nose, black hair—the cocked hat is very becoming. Now the 
pinch. His legs begin to knock a little, to become too long. 
This makes a visual impression comparable to the feeling a 
person has when he has a toothache and the teeth become too 
long for the mouth. If one is going to concentrate all the en- 
ergy in the eyes and direct them toward the second floor, one 
is likely to draw too much strength from the legs. Pardon me, 
Mr. Lieutenant, for halting this gaze in its ascension. It is a 
piece of impertinence, I know very well. This gaze cannot be 
said to say very much; rather, it says nothing at all, and yet it 
promises very much. But obviously these many promises are 
mounting too powerfully to his head; he is reeling, or to use 
the poet’s words about Agnes: he staggered, he fell.!41 

It is too bad, and if the matter had been left to me, it would 
never have happened. He is too good for that. It is really un- 
fortunate, for if one is going to impress the ladies as a gallant, 
one must never fall. Anyone wishing to be a gallant must be 
alert to such things. But if someone appears merely as an in- 
telligent being, all such things are of no importance; one is 
deeply absorbed in oneself, one droops, and if one actually 
does fall down, there is nothing striking about it. —What 
impression did this incident probably make on my little miss? 
It is too bad that I cannot be simultaneously on both sides of 
this Dardanelles street. I could, it is true, have an acquaintance 
posted on the other side, but for one thing I always prefer to 
make the observations myself, and for another, one can never 
know what may come out of this affair for me. In such a case, 
it is never good to have someone in on the secret, for then one 
must waste a good deal of time wresting from him what he 
knows and making him puzzled. 

Iam really becoming bored with my good lieutenant. Day 
in and day out, he marches past in full uniform. It is indeed a 
terrible kind of steadfastness.'*? Is this befitting for a soldier? 
Good sir, do you not carry side arms? Should you not take the 


The Seducer’s Diary 395 


house by storm and the girl by force? Of course, if you were a 
student, a licentiate, a curate, who keeps himself alive by 
hope,'* that would be another matter. '4*But I forgive you, 
for the girl pleases me the more I see her. She is beautiful; her 
brown eyes are full of roguishness. When she is awaiting your 
arrival, her countenance is transfigured by a higher beauty that 
is indescribably becoming to her. Therefore, I conclude that 
she must have great imagination, and imagination is the natu- 
ral cosmetic of the fair sex. 


My Cordelia, 

What is longing [Lengsel]? Language and poets rhyme [rime] 
it with the word “‘prison [Fangsel]’’. How unreasonable [uri- 
melig]! As if only the person sitting in prison could long. As if 
one could not long if one is free. Suppose that I were free— 
how I would long! And on the other hand, I am certainly free, 
free as a bird, and yet how I do long! I long when I am going 
to you; I long when I leave you; even when I am sitting at your 
side, I long for you. Can one, then, long for what one has? In- 
deed, if one considers that the next moment one may not have 
it. My longing is an eternal impatience. Only if I had lived 
through all eternities and assured myself that you belonged to 
me every moment, only then would I return to you and live 
through all eternities with you and certainly not have enough 
patience to be separated from you for one moment without 
longing but have enough assurance to sit calmly at your side. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

Outside the door there stands a little cabriolet, to me larger 
than the whole world, since it is large enough for two, hitched 
to a pair of horses, wild and unruly like the forces of nature, 
impatient like my passions, bold like your thoughts. If you 
wish, I shall carry you off—my Cordelia! Do you command 
it? Your command is the password [Losen] that lets loose 
[losne] the reins and the pleasure of flight. I am carrying you 
away, not from some people to others, but out of the world. 


I 
363 


396 Either/Or, I 


—The horses rear; the carriage rises up; the horses are stand- 
ing upright almost over our heads. We are driving through the 
clouds up into the heavens; the wind whistles about us; is it we 
who are sitting still and the whole world is moving, or is it our 
reckless flight? Are you dizzy, my Cordelia? Then hold fast to 
me; I do not become dizzy. Intellectually one never becomes 
dizzy if one thinks of only one thing, and I think only of you. 
Physically one never becomes dizzy if one looks fixedly at 
only one object, and I look only at you. Hold tight; if the 
world passed away, if our light carriage disappeared beneath 
us, we would still cling to each other, floating in the harmony 
of the spheres. '#5 


Your JOHANNES 


'46]t is almost too much. My servant has waited six hours, I 
myself two in the wind and rain, just to waylay that dear child 
Charlotte Hahn. She usually visits an old aunt of hers every 
Wednesday between two and five. Precisely today would have 
to be the day she did not come, precisely today when I did so 
much want to meet her. Why? Because she puts me in a very 
particular mood. I greet her; she curtseys in a way that simul- 
taneously is indescribably terrestrial and yet so heavenly. She 
almost stops; it is as if she were about to sink into the earth, 
and yet she has a look as if she were about to be elevated into 
the heavens. When I look at her, my mind simultaneously be- 
comes solemn and yet desiring. Otherwise, the girl means 
nothing to me; all I ask is this greeting, nothing more, even if 
she were willing to give it. Her greeting puts me in a mood, 
and in turn I squander this mood on Cordelia. —And yet I 
wager that she has slipped past us in one way or another. Not 
only in comedies but also in actual life is it difficult to keep 
watch on a young girl; one must have an eye on each finger. 
There was anymph, Cardea,!*” who spent her time fooling the 
menfolk. She lived in a wooded area, lured her lovers into the 
thicket, and vanished. She was going to fool Janus, too, but he 
fooled her, because he had eyes in the back of his head. 


The Seducer’s Diary 397 


My letters are not failing of their intention. They are devel- 
oping her mentally, even though not erotically. For that pur- 
pose, letters cannot be used, but notes. The more the erotic 
emerges, the shorter they become, but all the more unerringly 
they seize the erotic point. For in order not to make her senti- 
mental or soft, irony stiffens the feelings again but also makes 
her crave the sustenance of which she is most fond. Distantly 
and indefinitely, the notes give a presentiment of the highest. 
The moment this presentiment begins to dawn in her soul, the 
connection is broken. Through my resistance, the presenti- 
ment will take form within her soul as if it were her own 
thought, the impulse of her own heart. This is just what I 
want. 


My Cordelia, 

Somewhere in the city there lives a little family consisting of 
a widow and three daughters. Two of them go to the royal 
kitchen to learn how to cook. One afternoon in early summer, 
about five o’clock, the door to the drawing room opens softly, 
and a reconnoitering glance surveys the room. No one is there 
except a young girl sitting at the piano. The door is slightly 
ajar, so one can listen without being observed. The one play- 
ing is no great artist, for then the door would surely have been 
entirely closed. She is playing a Swedish melody; it is about 
the brief duration of youth and beauty. The words mock the 
girl’s youth and beauty; the girl’s youth and beauty mock the 
words. Which is right—the girl or the words? The music 
sounds so hushed and melancholy, as if sadness were the ar- 
bitrator that would settle the controversy. —But it is in the 
wrong, this sadness! What communion is there between youth 
and these reflections! What fellowship between morning and 
evening! The piano keys quiver and quake; the spirits of the 
soundboard spring up in confusion and do not understand one 
another. —-My Cordelia, why so vehement! Why this passion! 

How distant must an event be from us in time in order for 
us to recollect it; how distant so that recollection’s longing can 
no longer grasp it? In this respect, most people have a limit; 
they cannot recollect what is too close in time, nor can they 


365 


I 
366 


398 Either/Or, I 


recollect what is too distant. I know no limit. Yesterday’s ex- 
perience I push back a thousand years in time and recollect it as 
if it were experienced yesterday. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

I have a secret to confide to you, my confidante. To whom 
should I confide it? To echo? It would betray it. To the stars? 
They are cold. To human beings? They do not understand it. 
Only to you do I dare to confide it, for you know how to keep 
it. There is a girl, more beautiful than the dream of my soul, 
purer than the light of the sun, deeper than the springs of the 
sea, prouder than the flight of the eagle—there is a girl—O in- 
cline your head to my ear and to my words so that my secret 
can steal into it. —This girl I love more than my life, for she is 
my life; more than all my desires, for she is my only desire; 
more than all my thoughts, for she is my only thought; more 
warmly than the sun loves the flower, more intimately than 
grief loves the privacy of the troubled mind, more longingly 
than the burning sand of the desert loves the rain. I cling to her 
more tenderly than the mother’s eye to her child, more confi- 
dently than the entreating soul to God, more inseparably than 
the plant to its root. —Your head grows heavy and full of 
thoughts; it sinks down upon your breast; your bosom rises to 
come to its aid—my Cordelia! You have understood me, you 
have understood me correctly, literally; not one jot or tittle has 
escaped you! Shall I strain every nerve of my ears and let your 
voice convince me of it? Would I be able to doubt? Will you 
keep this secret? Dare I depend upon you? Tales are told of 
people who by dreadful crimes initiated each other into mutual 
silence.'*® To you I have confided a secret that is my life and 
the content of my life—have you nothing to confide to me that 
is so significant, so beautiful, so chaste that supranatural forces 
would be set in motion if it were betrayed? 


Your JOHANNES 


The Seducer’s Diary 399 


My Cordelia, 

The sky is cloudy—dark rain clouds scowl] like black eye- 
brows above its passionate countenance; the trees of the forest 
are in motion, tossed about by troubled dreams. You have dis- 
appeared from me into the forest. Behind every tree I see a 
feminine creature that resembles you; if I come closer, it hides 
behind the next tree. Do you not wish to show yourself to me, 
collect yourself? Everything is confused to me; the various 
parts of the forest lose their distinctive contours; I see every- 
thing as a sea of fog, where feminine creatures resembling you 
appear and disappear everywhere. I do not see you; you are 
continually moving in a wave of perception, and yet I am al- 
ready happy over every single resemblance to you. What is the 
reason—is it the copious unity of your nature or the scanty 
multiplicity of my nature? —To love you, is it not to love a 
world? 


Your JOHANNES 


It would be of real interest to me if it were possible to repro- 
duce very accurately the conversations I have with Cordelia. 
But I easily perceive that it is an impossibility, for even if I 
managed to recollect every single word exchanged between 
us, it nevertheless is out of the question to reproduce the ele- 
ment of contemporaneity, which actually is the nerve in con- 
versation, the surprise in the outburst, the passionateness, 
which is the life principle in conversation. Ordinarily, lam not 
prepared in advance, of course, for this is at variance with the 
essential nature of conversation, especially erotic conversa- 
tion. But I continually bear in mente [in mind] the content of 
my letters, always keep my eye on the mood they may have 
evoked in her. Of course, it could never occur to me to ask 
whether she has read my letter. It is easy to ascertain that she 
has read it. Nor do I ever speak directly with her about it, but 
I maintain secret communication with them in my conversa- 
tions, partly in order to fix more firmly in her soul some 
impression or other, partly in order to wrest it from her and 


367 


368 


400 Either/Or, I 


make her perplexed. Then she can read the letter again and 
gain a new impression from it and so forth. 

A change has taken place and is taking place in her. If 1 were 
to designate the state of her soul at this moment, I would say 
that it is pantheistic boldness. The expression in her eyes be- 
trays it at once. It is bold, almost reckless, in expectations, as 
if it asked for the extraordinary at every moment and was pre- 
pared to see it. Like the eye that gazes in the distance, this look 
sees beyond what immediately appears to it and sees the mar- 
velous. It is bold, almost reckless, in its expectancy—but not 
in self-confidence, and therefore it is rather dreaming and im- 
ploring, not proud and commanding. She is seeking the mar- 
velous outside herself; she will pray that it might make its ap- 
pearance, as if it were not in her power to call it forth. This 
must be prevented; otherwise I shall gain the upper hand too 
soon. Yesterday she told me there was something royal in my 
nature. Perhaps she wants to defer to me, but that absolutely 
will not do. To be sure, dear Cordelia, there is something 
royal in my nature, but you have no inkling of the kind of 
kingdom I have dominion over. It is over the tempests of 
moods. Like Aeolus,'*? I keep them shut up in the mountain of 
my personality and allow one and now another to go out. Flat- 
tery will give her self-esteem; the distinction between what is 
mine and what is yours will be affirmed; everything will be 
placed upon her. Flattery requires great care. Sometimes one 
must place oneself very high, yet in such a way that there re- 
mains a place still higher; sometimes one must place oneself 
very low. The former is more proper when one is moving in 
the direction of the intellectual; the latter is more proper when 
one is moving in the direction of the erotic. 

Does she owe me anything? Not at all. Could I wish that she 
did? Not at all. Iam too much a connoisseur, understand the 
erotic too well, for such foolishness. If this actually were the 
case, I would try with all my might to make her forget it and 
to lull to sleep my own thoughts about it. When it comes to 
the labyrinth of her heart, every young girl is an Ariadne;!5° 
she holds the thread by which one can find the way through— 


The Seducer’s Diary 401 


but she possesses it in such a way that she herself does not 
know how to use it. 


My Cordelia, 

Speak—I obey. Your desire is a command; your entreaty is 
an omnipotent adjuration; your every most evanescent wish is 
a boon to me, for I do not obey you as a ministering spirit, as 
if I stood outside you. When you command, your will comes 
into existence, and I along with it, for Iam a disarray of soul 
that simply awaits a word from you. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

You know that I very much like to talk with myself. I have 
found in myself the most interesting person among my ac- 
quaintances. At times, I have feared that I would come to lack 
material for these conversations; now I have no fear, for now I 
have you. I shall talk with myself about you now and for all 
eternity, about the most interesting subject with the most in- 
teresting person—ah, I am only an interesting person, you the 
most interesting subject. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

You find the time I have loved you to be so short; you al- 
most seem to fear that I could have loved before. There are 
manuscripts in which the fortunate eye quickly sees faintly an 
older writing that in the course of time has been supplanted by 
trivial inanities. With caustic substances, the later writing is 
erased, and now the older writing is distinct and clear. In the 
same way, your eye has taught me to find myself in myself. I 
allow forgetfulness to consume everything that does not touch 
on you, and then I discover a pristine, a divinely young, prim- 
itive text; then I discover that my love for you is just as old as 
I myself. 


Your JOHANNES 


369 


370 


402 Either/Or, I 


My Cordelia, 

How can a kingdom survive that is in conflict with itself;15! 
how can I survive if I am in conflict with myself? About what? 
About you—in order if possible to find repose in the thought 
that I am in love with you. But how am I to find this repose? 
One of the conflicting forces will continually convince the 
other that it is indeed the one most deeply and fervently in 
love; at the next moment, the other will. It would not concern 
me so much if the conflict were outside myself, if there were 
someone who dared to be in love with you or dared to desist— 
the crime is equally great—but this conflict within me con- 
sumes me, this one passion in its duplexity. 


Your JOHANNES 


Just vanish, my little fisherman’s daughter; just hide among 
the trees; just pick up your load, for bending over is so becom- 
ing to you—yes, this very minute you are bending over with 
a natural grace under the bundle of brushwood you have gath- 
ered. How is it that such a creature should have to carry such 
loads! Like a dancer, you betray the beauty of your form— 
small of waist, full of bosom, burgeoning in development— 
any recruiting officer must admit that. You perhaps think 
these are trifles; you believe that society women are far more 
beautiful. Alas, my child, you do not know how much false- 
ness there is in the world! Just set out upon your walk with 
your bundle into the enormous woods that presumably stretch 
many, many miles into the country to the border of the blue 
mountains. Perhaps you are not actually a fisherman’s daugh- 
ter but an enchanted princess; you are a troll’s domestic ser- 
vant, and he is cruel enough to make you pick up firewood in 
the woods. So it always goes in the fairy tale. Otherwise, why 
do you walk deeper into the forest? If you are really a fisher- 
man’s daughter, you will walk past me with your firewood 
down to the fishing village that lies on the other side of the 
road. 

Just take the footpath that winds easily among the trees; my 
eyes will find you. Just turn around and look at me; my eyes 


The Seducer’s Diary 403 


will follow you. You cannot make me move; longing does not 
carry me away; I am sitting calmly on the railing and smoking 
my cigar. —Some other time, perhaps. —Yes, when you turn 
back your head halfway in that manner, the expression in your 
eyes is roguish; your light step is beckoning. Yes, I know, I un- 
derstand where this path leads—to the solitude of the forest, to 
the whispering of the trees, to the abundant stillness. Look, 
the sky itself favors you. It hides itself in the clouds; it darkens 
the background of the forest, as if drawing the curtains for us. 
—Farewell, my beautiful fisherman’s daughter, take care of 
yourself! Thanks for your favor. It was a beautiful moment, a 
mood, not strong enough to move me from my firm seat on 
the railing but still abundant in inner motion. 


When Jacob had bargained with Laban about the payment 
for his service, when they agreed that Jacob should tend the 
white sheep and as reward for his work have all the motley- 
colored lambs born in his flock, he set rods in the watering 
troughs and had the sheep look at them'**—in the same way I 
place myself before Cordelia everywhere; her eyes see me con- 
tinually. To her it seems like sheer attentiveness from my part, 
but on my side I know that her soul thereby loses interest for 
everything else, that there is being developed within her a 
mental concupiscence that sees me everywhere. 


My Cordelia, 

As if I could forget you! Is my love, then, a work of mem- 
ory [Hukommelse]? Even if time erased everything from its 
blackboards, even if it erased memory itself, my relationship 
with you would remain just as alive, you would still not be 
forgotten. As if I could forget you! What, then, should I rec- 
ollect [erindre]? After all, I have forgotten myself in order to 
recollect you, so if I forgot you, I would then recollect myself, 
but the moment I remembered myself I would have to recol- 
lect you again. As if I could forget you! What would happen 
then? There is a painting from ancient times that shows Ar- 
iadne leaping up from her couch and anxiously watching a 
ship speeding away under full sail.!? At her side stands Cupid 


371 


372 


404 Either/Or, I 


with an unstrung bow and dries his eyes. Behind her stands a 
winged female figure with a helmet on her head. The figure is 
usually assumed to be Nemesis.'&gt;4 Imagine this picture; imag- 
ine it slightly changed. Cupid is not weeping and his bow is 
not unstrung, or would you then have become less beautiful, 
less triumphant, because I had gone out of my mind. Cupid 
smiles and draws the bow. Nemesis does not stand idle at your 
side; she, too, draws her bow. In that old painting, we see on 
the ship a manly figure busy at his work. Presumably it is The- 
seus. Not so in my picture. He is standing in the stern; he is 
looking back longingly. He is stretching out his arms; he has 
repented of it or, more correctly, his madness has left him, but 
the ship is carrying him away. Cupid and Nemesis both aim, 
an arrow flies from each bow, they accurately hit the mark; we 
see and we understand that both have hit one spot in his heart 
to symbolize that his love was the Nemesis that avenged. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

I am in love with myself, people say of me. That does not 
surprise me, for how would it be possible for them to see that 
I can love, since I love only you? How could anyone else sus- 
pect it, since I love only you? I am in love with myself. And 
why? Because I am in love with you; for you I love and you 
alone and everything that truly belongs to you, and thus [ love 
myself because this self of mine belongs to you, so that if I 
stopped loving you, I would stop loving myself. Therefore, 
what is an expression of the utmost egotism in the world’s 
profane eyes is in your initiated eyes an expression of the pur- 
est sympathy; what is an expression of the most prosaic self- 
preservation in the world’s profane eyes is in your sanctified 
sight an expression of most inspired self-annihilation. 


Your JOHANNES 


What I feared most was that the whole process would take 
me too long a time. I see, however, that Cordelia is making 
great progress, yes, that it will be necessary, in order to keep 


The Seducer’s Diary 405 


her inspired, to set everything in motion. She must not for all 
the world become listless ahead of time, that is, before that 
time when her time is up. 


When in love, one does not take the highway. It is only mar- 
riage that is right in the middle of the king’s highway. If one is 
in love and walks from Neddebo, one does not go along Es- 
rom Lake, even though the path is really only a hunting path, 
but it is a beaten path, and love prefers to beat its own path. 
One proceeds deeper into Gribs forest.55 And when a couple 
wanders arm in arm in this way, each understands the other; 
that which obscurely delighted and pained before becomes 
clear now. There is no hint of anyone’s presence. —So this 
lovely beech tree becomes a witness to your love; under its 
crown you two confessed it for the first time. You recollected 
everything so clearly—the first time you saw each other, the 
first time you took each other’s hands in the dance, when you 
parted toward morning, when you would not admit anything 
to yourselves, let alone to each other. —It really is beautiful to 
listen to these love rehearsals. —They fell on their knees under 
the tree; they swore unbreakable love to each other; they 
sealed the pact with the first kiss. —These are productive 
moods that must be squandered on Cordelia. —So this beech 
tree became a witness. Oh, well, a tree is a quite suitable wit- 
ness, but nevertheless it is too little. Presumably you two are 
thinking that heaven, too, was a witness, but heaven as such is 
a very abstract idea. Therefore, you see, there was still another 
witness. —Should I stand up and let them see that I am here? 
No, they may know me, and then the game is over. When 
they are some distance away, should I stand up and let them 
know someone was present? No, that is pointless. Silence 
must rest over their secret—as long as I want it to. They are in 
my power; I can separate them when I want to. I know their 
secret; only from him or from her can I have found it out— 
from her personally, that is impossible; consequently from 
him, it is detestable—bravo! And yet it is indeed almost mal- 
ice. Well, I shall see. If I can gain a definite impression of her 


373 


374 


406 Either/Or, I 


that I otherwise cannot obtain in the ordinary way, which | 
prefer, then there is nothing else to do. 


My Cordelia, 

Poor am I—you are my wealth; dark—you are my light; I 
own nothing, need nothing. Indeed, how should I be able to 
own anything; it is indeed a contradiction that a person who 
does not own himself can own something. I am happy like a 
child who cannot and must not own anything. I own nothing, 
for I belong only to you. Iam not; I have ceased to be, in order 
to be yours. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

“My’’—what does the word designate? Not what belongs 
to me, but what I belong to, what contains my whole being, 
which is mine insofar as I belong to it. After all, my God is not 
the God who belongs to me, but the God to whom I belong, 
and the same when I say my native land, my home, my call- 
ing, my longing, my hope. If there had been no immortality 
before, then the thought that I am yours would break through 
nature’s usual course. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

What am I? The humble narrator who follows your 
triumphs, the dancer who bows under you as you soar in 
lovely buoyancy, the branch upon which you momentarily 
rest when you are tired of flying, the bass voice!* that inter- 
jects itself under the soprano’s ebullience to make it ascend 
even higher—what am I? I am the earthly force of gravity that 
keeps you captive to the earth. What am I, then? Body, sub- 
stance, earth, dust, and ashes. —You, my Cordelia, you are 
soul and spirit. 


Your JOHANNES 


The Seducer’s Diary 407 


My Cordelia, 

Love is everything; therefore, for one who loves everything 
ceases to have intrinsic meaning and has meaning only 
through the interpretation love gives to it. Thus, ifsome other 
engaged man became convinced that there was another girl he 
cared for, he probably would stand there like a criminal, and 
she would be outraged. But you, I know, you would see es- 
teem in such a confession, for you know that it is impossible 
for me to love another—it is my love for you that casts a luster 
over all of life. So ifI care for another, it is not to convince my- 
self that I do not love her but only you—that would be pre- 
sumptuous—but since my whole soul is full of you, life ac- 
quires another meaning for me—it becomes a myth about 
you. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

My love consumes me; only my voice remains,'5’ a voice 
that has fallen in love with you, that whispers everywhere to 
you that I love you. Oh! Does it weary you to hear this voice? 
It surrounds you everywhere; I wrap my thoroughly reflective 
soul, like a manifold mobile frame, around your pure, deep 
being. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

We read in old stories that a river fell in love with a 
maiden. 5° Just so is my soul like a river that loves you. It is 
still at times and reflects your image deeply and calmly. At 
times it fancies that it has taken your image captive and tosses 
up its waves to prevent you from escaping again; then it rip- 
ples its surface gently and plays with your image. At times it 
has lost it, and then its waves become dark and despairing. — 
Just so is my soul—like a river that has fallen in love with you. 


Your JOHANNES!&gt;? 


375 


376 


408 Either/Or, I 


To be honest, it does not take unusually vivid imaginative 
power to conceive of a conveyance that is more convenient, 
comfortable, and, above all, more consistent with one’s sta- 
tion in life. To ride with a peat cutter—that attracts attention 
but not in the desirable sense. But in an emergency, one ac- 
cepts it with thanks. You walk some distance out in the coun- 
try. You climb up, ride a mile, and encounter nothing; two 
miles, and everything goes well. You begin to feel safe and se- 
cure; the scenery actually is better than usual from this level. 
Almost three miles have gone by—who would ever have ex- 
pected to meet a Copenhagener way out on a country road? 
And he is a Copenhagener, that you can see well enough. He 
is not from the country; he has an altogether singular way of 
looking at things—so definite, so observant, so appraising, 
and so little given to derision. Well, my dear girl, your posi- 
tion is by no means comfortable; you look as if you were sit- 
ting on atray. The cart is so flat that it has no recess for the feet. 
—But it is, of course, your own fault. My carriage is entirely 
at your service; I take the liberty of offering you a much more 
comfortable seat, if it will not be too uncomfortable for you to 
sit beside me. In that case, I shall place the whole carriage at 
your disposal and sit in the driver’s box myself, happy to be 
allowed to drive you to your destination. —The straw hat 
does not even shield you sufficiently from a sidelong glance. It 
is futile for you to bow your head; I still admire your beautiful 
profile. —Is it not annoying that the peasant bows to me? But, 
after all, it is proper for a peasant to bow to a distinguished 
man. —You are not getting off so lightly. Well, here is a tav- 
ern, a post house, and a peat cutter is much too pious in his 
way to neglect his devotions. Now I shall take care of him. I 
have an extraordinary talent for fascinating peat cutters. Oh, 
would that I might also succeed in pleasing you! He cannot re- 
sist my invitation, and once he has accepted it, he cannot resist 
the effects of it. If] cannot, then my servant can. —He is going 
into the barroom now; you are alone in the wagon in the shed. 
—God knows what kind of girl this is! Could this be a little 
middle-class miss, perhaps the daughter of parish clerk? If so, 
she is unusually pretty and unusually well dressed for a parish 


The Seducer’s Diary 409 


clerk’s daughter. The parish clerk must have a good salary. It 
occurs to me: Could she perhaps be a little blueblood miss who 
is tired of driving in a fine carriage, who perhaps is taking a 
little hike out to the country house and now also wants to try 
her hand at a little adventure? Quite possibly, such things are 
not unheard of. —The peasant does not know anything; he is 
a clod who only knows how to drink. Yes, yes, go on drink- 
ing, my good man; you are welcome to it. 

But what do I see—it is none other than Miss Jespersen, 
Hansine Jespersen, daughter of the wholesaler. Good heavens, 
we two know each other. It was she I once met on Bredgade. 
160She was riding backwards; she could not raise the window. 
I put on my glasses and had the enjoyment of following her 
with my eyes. It was a very awkward situation; there were so 
many in the carriage that she could not move and presumably 
did not dare to make any outcry. The present situation is even 
more awkward. We two are destined for each other; that is ob- 
vious. She must be a romantic little miss; she is definitely out 
on her own initiative. —There comes my servant with the peat 
cutter. He is dead drunk. It is disgusting. They are a depraved 
lot, these peat cutters. Alas, yes! And yet there are even worse 
people than peat cutters. —See, now you are in a pretty mess. 
Now you yourself will have to drive the horses—how roman- 
tic! —You refuse my offer; you insist that you are a good 
driver. You do not deceive me; I perceive very well how crafty 
you are. When you have gone a little way you are going to 
jump out; in the woods one can easily find a hiding place. — 
My horse will be saddled; I shall follow on horseback. —You 
see, now I am ready, now you can be safe against any attack. 
—Please do not be so terribly afraid; then I shall turn back at 
once. I merely wanted to make you a little uneasy and give you 
an occasion for the heightening of your natural beauty. After 
all, you do not know that it is I who caused the peasant to get 
drunk, and I certainly have not taken the liberty of one offen- 
sive word to you. Everything can still be all right; I daresay 
that I shall give the affair such a turn that you can laugh at the 
whole episode. I just want a little unsettled account with you. 
Never think that I take any girl by surprise. I am a friend of 


377 


378 


410 Either/Or, I 


freedom, and I do not care for anything I do not receive freely. 
—“You will certainly see for yourself that it will not do to con- 
tinue the journey this way. I myself am going hunting; there- 
fore I am on horseback. But my carriage is harnessed at the 
tavern. If you give the order, it will catch up with you at once 
and take you wherever you wish. I myself, I regret, cannot 
have the pleasure of escorting you; [am committed to a hunt- 
ing engagement, and they are sacred.” —But you accept. — 
Everything will promptly be in order. —See, you have no 
need at all to be embarrassed by seeing me again, or in any case 
no more embarrassed than is very becoming to you. You can 
be amused by the whole affair, laugh a little, and think about 
me a little. I ask no more. It might seem to be very little, but 
for me that is enough. It is a beginning, and I am especially 
good at the principles of beginnings. 


Yesterday evening there was a little party at the aunt’s. I 
knew Cordelia would take out her knitting. I had hidden a lit- 
tle note in it. She dropped it, picked it up, was stirred, wistful. 
One should always make use of the situation in this way. It is 
unbelievable what advantage can be derived from it. An in- 
trinsically insignificant little note, read under such circum- 
stances, becomes enormously significant for her. She had no 
chance to talk to me, for I had arranged things so that I had to 
escort a lady home. She was obliged to wait, therefore, until 
today. This is always a good way to drill the impression all the 
deeper into her soul. It always seems as if I were the one who 
paid attention to her; the advantage I have is that I am placed 
in her thoughts everywhere, that I surprise her everywhere. 


'6tErotic love does have its distinctive dialectic. There was a 
young girl with whom I was once in love. At the theater in 
Dresden! last summer, I saw an actress who bore a remarka- 
ble resemblance to her. Because of that, I wanted to make her 
acquaintance, and did succeed, and then realized that the dis- 
similarity was rather great. Today on the street I meet a lady 
who reminds me of that actress. This story can be continued 
as long as you wish. 


The Seducer’s Diary 411 


My thoughts surround Cordelia everywhere. 1 send them 
like angels around her. Just as Venus in her chariot is drawn by 
doves, so she sits in her triumphal chariot, and I harness my 
thoughts in front like winged creatures. She herself sits there 
happy, exuberant like a child, omnipotent like a goddess; I 
walk along at her side. Truly, a young girl is and remains the 
Venerabile [something worthy of veneration] of nature and of 
all existence! No one knows that better than I. But what a pity 
that this glory lasts such a short time. She smiles at me, she 
greets me, she beckons to me—as if she were my sister. A 
glance reminds her that she is my beloved. 


Erotic love has many gradations. Cordelia is making good 
progress. She is sitting on my lap; her arm, soft and warm, 
winds around my neck. Light, without physical weight, she 
rests against my chest; her soft curves scarcely brush against 
me. Like a flower, this lovely creature entwines me, free as a 
bow. Her eyes hide behind her lashes; her bosom is as dazzling 
white as snow, so smooth that my eyes cannot rest; they 
would slide offifher bosom did not move. What does this stir- 
ring mean? Is it love? Perhaps. It is the presentiment of love, 
the dream of love. As yet it lacks energy. She embraces me en- 
compassingly, as the cloud embraces the transfigured one, 
lightly as a breeze, softly as one cups a flower; she kisses me as 
vaguely as the sky kisses the sea, as gently and quietly as the 
dew kisses the flower, as solemnly as the sea kisses the image 
of the moon. 

At this moment, I would call her passion a naive passion. 
When the turn is made and I begin to pull back in earnest, then 
she will summon up everything in order really to take me cap- 
tive. She has no other means for that than the erotic itself, ex- 
cept that this will now manifest itself on an entirely different 
scale. Then it will be a weapon in her hand that she swings 
against me. Then I will have reflected passion. She will strug- 
gle for her own sake, because she knows I have the erotic in 
my possession; she will fight for her own sake in order to van- 
quish me. She herself needs a higher form of the erotic. What 
I taught her to sense by inciting her, my coldness will now 


i 
379 


380 


412 Either/Or, I 


teach her to comprehend, but in such a way that she will be- 
lieve that she herself discovers it. She will take me by surprise 
with it; she will think that she has outdone me in boldness and 
thereby has taken me captive. Then her passion will be defi- 
nite, energetic, ‘determined, dialectical; her kissing will be 
consummate, her embrace not hiatic. —In me she is seeking 
her freedom, and the more firmly I encircle her, the better she 
will find it. The engagement will break. When this has hap- 
pened, she will need a little rest, lest something unlovely come 
out in this wild turmoil. Her passion will rally once again, and 
she will be mine. 


Just as even in poor Edward’s time I indirectly looked after 
her reading, now I do so directly. What I am offering is what I 
regard as the best nourishment: mythology and fairy tales. Yet 
here as everywhere she has her freedom; I learn everything 
about her by listening to her. If it is not there already, then I 
put it there first. 1° 


165When the servant girls go to Deer Park in the summer, it 
usually affords scant pleasure. They go there only once a year, 
and therefore they expect to have as much as possible from it. 
So they must wear a hat and shawl and disfigure themselves in 
every way. The merriment is wild, graceless, lascivious. No, 
then I prefer Frederiksberg Gardens. Sunday afternoons they 
go there, and I also. Here everything is seemly and decent; the 
merriment itself more quiet and refined. On the whole, the 
man who has no sense for servant girls loses more by it than 
they lose. The great host of servant girls is actually the most 
beautiful militia we have in Denmark. If I were king, I know 
what I would do—I would not review the regular troops. If] 
were one of the city’s thirty-two men, 'I would promptly pe- 
tition for the establishment of a committee of public safety that 
would try by every means—by insight, counsel, admonition, 
appropriate rewards—to encourage servant girls to dress with 
care and taste. Why should their beauty go to waste? Why 
should it go through life unnoticed? '6’Let it at least be seen 
once a week in the light under which it appears at its best! But 


The Seducer’s Diary 413 


above all, good taste, restraint. A servant girl should not look 
like a lady—there Politivennen'® is right, but the reasons this 
respected newspaper gives are entirely fallacious. If we then 
may dare to anticipate such a desirable flowering of the maid- 
servant class, would not this in turn have a beneficial effect on 
the daughters in our homes? Or is it rash of me to catch a 
glimpse along this particular road of a future for Denmark that 
truly can be called matchless? If only I myself might be al- 
lowed to be contemporary with this golden age,!® then with 
good conscience I could spend the whole day walking around 
the streets and lanes and delight in the pleasures of the eyes! — 
How bold and spacious are my teeming thoughts, how pa- 
triotic! But here I am, of course, out in Frederiksberg where 
the servant girls come on Sunday afternoon and I, too. 

First come the peasant girls holding hands with their sweet- 
hearts, or in another pattern, all the girls in front holding 
hands and the fellows behind, or in another pattern, two girls 
and one fellow. This flock forms the frame; they usually stand 
or sit under the trees in the great square in front of the pavil- 
lion. They are healthy and lively; the color contrasts are a bit 
too strong—their clothing as well as their complexions. Inside 
come the girls from Jylland and Fyn—tall, straight, a little too 
powerfully built, their clothing somewhat mixed. Here there 
would be much for the committee to do. Nor is a representa- 
tive of the Bornholm division lacking here either: clever 
kitchen girls but rough customers both in the kitchen and here 
in Frederiksberg—there is something proudly repelling in 
their nature. Thus by contrast their presence here is not with- 
out effect, and I would be loath to do without them, but I sel- 
dom become involved with them. 

Now come the select troops—the Nyboder girls, less tall, 
well rounded and filled out, delicate in complexion, merry, 
happy, quick, talkative, a bit coquettish, and, above all, bare- 
headed. Their attire may often approximate a lady’s except for 
two things: they wear scarves and not shawls, and no hats—at 
most a little fluttering cap, but preferably they should be bare- 
headed. —Well, good day, Marie! So we meet out here. It is a 
long time since I saw you. Are you still at the councilor’s? 


381 


382 


414 Either/Or, I 


“Yes.” It is a very good place, I imagine. ‘‘Yes.”’ But you are 
so alone out here, have no one to go with—no sweetheart—or 
perhaps he has no time today, or you are waiting for him. — 
What, you are not engaged? Impossible! The prettiest girl in 
Copenhagen, a girl who works at the councilor’s, a girl who is 
an ornament and a model for all servant girls, a girl who 
knows how to dress so neatly and—so sumptuously. That is 
indeed a pretty handkerchief you are holding in your hand, 
made of the finest linen. And what do I see, edged with em- 
broidery? I wager it cost ten marks. There is many a fine lady 
who does not own its equal. French gloves, a silk umbrella— 
and such a girl is not engaged. It is indeed preposterous. !If } 
remember correctly, Jens thought a good deal of you—you 
know whom I mean—Jens, the wholesaler’s Jens, the one up 
there on the third floor. —You see, I hit it on the head. Why 
didn’t you become engaged? After all, Jens was a handsome 
fellow, had a good job; perhaps with a little pull on the part of 
the wholesaler, in time he could have become a policeman or a 
fireman; it wouldn’t have been such a bad match. —You must 
be to blame yourself; you must have been too hard on him. 
“No! But I found out that Jens had been engaged once before 
to a girl he did not treat very well at all.” —What am I hearing? 
Who would have thought that Jens was such a bad fellow? — 
Yes, those guardsmen, those guardsmen, they are not to be 
trusted. —You did absolutely right; a girl like you is much too 
good to be thrown to just anybody. —You will surely make a 
better match, I can vouch for that. —How is Miss Juliane? I 
have not seen her for a long time. Would my pretty Marie be 
so kind as to enlighten me about a few things. —Because one 
has been unhappy in love, one should not therefore be unsym- 
pathetic toward others. —There are so many people here. —I 
dare not speak with you about it; | am afraid someone might 
spy on me. —Please listen for a moment, my pretty Marie. 
Look, here is a place on this shaded path where the trees are 
entwined together to hide us from others, where we see no 
one, hear no human voices, only the soft echo of the music. 
Here I dare speak about my secret. Is it not true, if Jens had not 
been a bad fellow you would have walked with him here, arm 


The Seducer’s Diary 415 


in arm, listened to the jolly music, even enjoyed a still 
more...... Why are you so agitated—forget Jens. —Do 
you want to be unfair to me? It was to meet you that I came 
out here. It was to see you that I visited the councilor’s. You 
must have noticed—every time I had a chance I always went to 
the kitchen door. You are going to be mine. The banns will be 
read from the pulpit. Tomorrow evening I will explain every- 
thing to you—up the kitchen stairway, the door to the left, di- 
rectly opposite the kitchen door. —-Good-bye, my pretty 
Marie. Do not mention to anyone that you have seen me out 
here or spoken with me. Now you know my secret. She is 
very lovely; something could be done with her. Once I get a 
foothold in her room, I can read the banns from the pulpit my- 
self. [ have always tried to develop the beautiful Greek attdo- 
zeta. [self-sufficiency] and in particular to make a pastor super- 
fluous. 


If I could manage to stand behind Cordelia when she re- 
ceives a letter from me, it would be of great interest to me. 
Then it would be easy for me to find out to what extent she has 
in the most proper sense appropriated them erotically. On the 
whole, letters are and will continue to be a priceless means of 
making an impression on a young girl; the dead letter of writ- 
ing often has much more influence than the living word.17! A 
letter is a secretive communication; one is master of the situa- 
tion, feels no pressure from anyone’s actual presence, and I do 
believe a young girl would prefer to be all alone with her ideal, 
that is, at certain moments, and precisely at those moments 
when it has the strongest effect on her mind. Even if her ideal 
has found an ever so perfect expression in a particular beloved 
object, there nevertheless are moments when she feels that in 
the ideal there is a vastness that the actuality does not have. 
These great festivals of atonement must be permitted her, ex- 
cept that one must be careful to use them properly so that she 
comes back to the actuality not fatigued but strengthened. In 
this, letters are an aid; they help one to be invisibly and men- 
tally present in these moments of sacred dedication, while the 


383 


384 


416 Either/Or, I 


idea that the actual person is the author of the letter forms a 
natural and easy transition to the actuality!” 


Could I become jealous of Cordelia? Damn it, yes! And yet 
in another sense, no! That is, if I saw that her nature would be 
disordered and not be what I want it to be—even though I won 
in the clash with another—then I would give her up. 

An ancient philosopher has said that if a person carefully 
chronicles all his experiences, he is, before he knows where he 
is, a philosopher.!”? For a long time now, I have lived in asso- 
ciation with the fellowship of the engaged. Such a connection 
certainly ought to yield some harvest. I have thought of gath- 
ering material for a book titled: A Contribution to a Theory of the 
Kiss, dedicated to all doting lovers.!”4 Incidentally, it is curious 
that there is no book on this topic. If I manage to finish it, I 
shall also fill a long-felt need. Can the reason for this deficiency 
in the literature be that philosophers do not think about such 
things or that they do not understand them? —I am already in 
a position to offer some hints. A perfect kiss requires that the 
agents be a girl and a man. A man-to-man kiss is in bad taste, 
or, worse yet, it tastes bad. —In the next place, it is my opin- 
ion that a kiss comes closer to the idea when a man kisses a girl 
than when a girl kisses a man. When over the years the distinc- 
tion has been lost in this relationship, the kiss has lost its mean- 
ing. That is the case with the conjugal domestic kiss, by which 
husband and wife, for want of a napkin, wipe each other’s 
mouth while saying ““May it do us good [ Velbekom’s].”’ 

If the age gap is very great, the kiss lies outside the idea. I 
recall a special expression used by the senior class of an outly- 
ing girls’ school—“‘to kiss the councilor”’—an expression with 
anything but agreeable connotations. It began this way. The 
teacher had a brother-in-law living in the house. He was an 
elderly man, formerly a councilor, and because of his age he 
took the liberty of kissing the young girls. 

The kiss must be the expression of a particular passion. 
When a brother and sister who are twins kiss each other, it is 
not an authentic kiss. The same holds for a kiss paid in Christ- 
mas games, also for a stolen kiss. A kiss is a symbolic act that 


The Seducer’s Diary 417 


is meaningless if devoid of the feeling it is supposed to signify, 
and this feeling can be present only under specific conditions. 

‘&gt;If one wants to try to classify kisses, numerous possible 
principles of classification come to mind. The kiss can be clas- 
sified according to sound. Unfortunately, language does not 
have an adequate range for my observations. I do not believe 
all the languages of the world have the stock of onomatopoeiea 
necessary to designate the variations I have come across just in 
my uncle’s house. Sometimes it is a smacking sound, some- 
times whistling, sometimes slushy, sometimes explosive, 
sometimes booming, sometimes full, sometimes hollow, 
sometimes like calico, etc. etc. 

The kiss can be classified according to touch—the tangential 
kiss, the kiss en passant, and the clinging kiss. 

The kiss can be classified according to time as short or long. 
In the category of time, there is another classification, really 
the only one I like. A distinction is made between the first kiss 
and all the others. What is under consideration here cannot be 
used as the measure of what appears in the other classifica- 
tions—it has nothing to do with sound, touch, time in general. 
The first kiss is qualitatively different from all others. Very 
few people think about this. It would be a shame if there were 
not even one who thinks about it. 


My Cordelia, 

A good answer is like a sweet kiss, says Solomon.'”6 As you 
know, I have a weakness for asking questions; I may almost be 
censured for it. This happens because people do not under- 
stand what I am asking about, for you and you alone under- 
stand what I am asking about, and you and you alone know 
how to answer, and you and you alone know how to give a 
good answer, for, as Solomon says, a good answer is like a 
sweet kiss. 


Your JOHANNES 


There is a difference between the mental erotic and the 
earthly erotic. Until now, I have tried mainly to develop the 


385 


386 


418 _ Either/Or, I 


mental kind in Cordelia. My personal presence must be differ- 
ent now, not just the accompanying mood; it must be tempt- 
ing. These days, I have been continually preparing myself by 
reading the well-known passage in the Phaedrus'” about erotic 
love. It electrifies my whole being and is an excellent prelude. 
Plato really had knowledge of the erotic.17 


My Cordelia, 

1The Latinist says of an attentive pupil that he hangs on his 
teacher’s lips. For love, everything is a symbol; in recom- 
pense, the symbol in turn is actuality. Am I not a diligent, at- 
tentive pupil? But you do not say a word. 


Your JOHANNES 


If anyone other than I were directing this development, he 
presumably would be too sagacious to let himself direct. If I 
were to consult an initiate among those who are engaged, he 
would no doubt say with a great flourish of erotic audacity: In 
these gradations of love, I seek in vain for the Chladni figure!®° 
in which the lovers converse about their love. I would answer: 
I am pleased that you look in vain, for the figure does not be- 
long within the scope of the essentially erotic, not even when 
the interesting is drawn into it. Erotic love is much too sub- 
stantial to be satisfied with chatter, the erotic situations much 
too significant to be filled with chatter. They are silent, still, 
definitely outlined, and yet eloquent, like the music of Mem- 
non’s statue.'®! Eros gesticulates, does not speak; or if he does, 
it is an enigmatic intimation, symbolic music. The erotic sit- 
uations are always either sculptural or pictorial, but two peo- 
ple speaking together about their love is neither sculptural nor 
pictorial. But the solid engaged couple always begin with such 
chitchat, which goes on to become the thread that holds their 
loquacious marriage together. This chitchat is also the begin- 
ning of the dowry Ovid mentions: dos est uxoria lites [the 
dowry of a wife is quarreling]'®? and the guarantee that their 
marriage will not lack it. —If there must be speaking, it is suf+ 
ficient that one person does it. The man should do the speak- 


The Seducer’s Diary 419 


ing and therefore ought to possess some of the powers in the 
girdle of Venus!® with which she beguiled: conversation and 
sweet flattery, that is, the power to ingratiate. —It by no 
means follows that Eros is mute, or that it would be erotically 
improper to converse, provided that the conversation itself is 
erotic and does not wander off into edifying observations on 
life’s prospects etc. and that the conversation is actually re- 
garded as a respite from the erotic action, a diversion, not as 
the ultimate. Such a conversation, such a confabulatio [fantas- 
izing together], is entirely divine by nature, and I can never be- 
come bored conversing with a young girl. That is, I can be- 
come weary ofa particular young girl, but never of conversing 
with a young girl. That is just as impossible for me as it is to 
become weary of breathing. What is really the distinctive char- 
acteristic of such speaking together is the vegetative flowering 
of conversation. The conversation keeps contact with the 
earth, has no actual subject; the accidental is the law of its 
movements—but daisy [ Tusindfryd, thousand delights] is its 
name and the name of what it produces. 


My Cordelia, 

“My—Your’—those words, like parentheses, enclose the 
paltry content of my letters. Have you noticed that the dis- 
tance between its arms is becoming shorter? O my Cordelia! 
'84T¢ is nevertheless beautiful that the emptier the parenthesis 
becomes the more momentous it is. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 
Is an embrace a struggle?!® 


Your JOHANNES 


Usually Cordelia keeps silent. This has always made me 
happy. She has too deep a womanly nature to pester one with 
hiatuses, a mode of speaking especially characteristic of 
women and unavoidable when the man who should supply the 
preceding or succeeding circumscribing consonant is just as 


387 


388 


420 Either/Or, I 


feminine. But at times a single brief remark betrays how much 
dwells within her. Then I assist her. It is as if behind a person, 
who with an unsure hand hastily made a few strokes in a draw- 
ing, there stood another person who every time made some- 
thing vivid and finished out of it. She herself is surprised, and 
yet it is as if it belonged to her. This is why I watch over her, 
over every chance remark, every casual word, and as I give it 
back to her it always becomes something more significant, 
which she both recognizes and does not recognize. 


Today we were at a party. We had not exchanged a word 
with each other. We rose from the table; then a servant came 
in and told Cordelia that there was a messenger who wished to 
speak with her. This messenger was from me, bringing a letter 
alluding to a remark I had made at the table. I had managed to 
introduce it into the general dinner conversation in such a way 
that Cordelia, although she sat some distance from me, was 
bound to hear it and misunderstand it. The letter was com- 
posed with this in mind. If] had been unable to turn the dinner 
conversation in that direction, I would have been present at the 
designated time to confiscate the letter. She came in again and 
had to tell a little white lie. Such things consolidate the erotic 
secretiveness without which she cannot walk the path assigned 
to her. 


My Cordelia, 

Do you believe that the person who pillows his head on an 
elf-hillock sees the image of an elf-girl in his dreams? I do not 
know, but this I do know—when I rest my head upon your 
breast and then do not close my eyes but look up, I see an an- 
gel’s face. Do you believe that the person who leans his head 
against an elf-hillock cannot lie quietly? I do not think so, but 
this Ido know—that when my head inclines upon your bosom 
it is too deeply stirred for sleep to alight upon my eyes. 


Your JOHANNES!86 


Jacta est alea [The die is cast].187 Now the turn must be made. 
I was with her today but was completely engrossed in thinking 


The Seducer’s Diary 421 


about an idea that totally occupied me. I had neither eyes nor 
ears for her. The idea itself was interesting and captivated her. 
Furthermore, it would have been incorrect to begin the new 
operation by being cold in her presence. After I have gone and 
the thought no longer occupies her, she will easily discover 
that I was different from what I have usually been. Because she 
discovers this change in her solitude, the discovery will be 
much more painful for her, will work its effect more slowly 
but all the more penetratingly. She cannot promptly flare up, 
and when she does have a chance she will already have thought 
out so much to say that she cannot say it all at once but will 
always retain a remnant of doubt. The disquietude mounts, 
the letters stop coming, the erotic rations are diminished, 
erotic love is mocked as something ludicrous. Perhaps she 
goes along with it for a time, but in the long run she cannot 
endure it. Then she will want to make me captive with the 
same means I have employed against her—with the erotic. 


'8On the subject of breaking an engagement, every little 
miss is a great casuist, and although in the schools there is no 
course on the subject, every little slip of a girl is superbly in- 
formed when the question is under what circumstances an en- 
gagement should be broken. This really ought to be the stand- 
ing question in the senior examination, and although I know 
that generally the papers written in girls’ schools are very 
much the same, I am sure that there would be no lack of vari- 
ety here, since the issue itself opens a wide field to a girl’s 
acuteness. And why should a young girl not be given the op- 
portunity to use her acuteness in the most brilliant manner? Or 
will she not precisely thereby have the opportunity to show 
that she is mature enough—to become engaged? I once wit- 
nessed a situation '*°that interested me very much. One day, 
the parents in a family I sometimes visited were absent; how- 
ever, the two daughters of the household had invited a circle of 
girl friends for morning coffee. There were eight in all, be- 
tween the ages of sixteen and twenty. Very likely they had not 
expected a visit—in fact, the maid even had orders to say they 
were not at home. But I went in and clearly perceived that they 


389 


390 


422 Either/Or, I 


were somewhat surprised. God knows what eight young girls 
like that discuss in such a solemn synodical meeting. At times, 
married women also convene in similar meetings. Then they 
discourse on pastoral theology, discussing in particular such 
important questions as: under what circumstances it is all right 
to allow a maidservant to go to market alone; whether it is bet- 
ter to have a charge account at the butcher’s or to pay cash; the 
likelihood that the kitchenmaid has a sweetheart; how to elim- 
inate all this sweetheart traffic that delays the cooking. 

190T found my place in this beautiful cluster. It was very early 
in the spring. The sun sent out a few odd shafts of light as ex- 
press messengers of its arrival. Inside the apartment, every- 
thing was wintry, and for that very reason the sun’s rays were 
so portentous. The coffee shed fragrance at the table, and the 
young girls themselves were happy, healthy, blooming—and 
hilarious, for their anxiety had quickly subsided. What was 
there to be afraid of, after all; in a way they were strong in 
manpower. I managed to direct their attention and conversa- 
tion to the question: under what circumstances should an en- 
gagement be broken. While my eyes delighted in flitting from 
one flower to the next in this circle of girls, delighted in resting 
now on this beauty, now on that one, my outer ears delighted 
in reveling in the enjoyment of the music of their voices, and 
my inner ears delighted in listening closely to what was said. 
A single word was frequently enough for me to gain a deep in- 
sight into such a girl’s heart and its history. How seductive are 
the ways of love, and how interesting to explore how far along 
the way the individual is. I continually fanned the flames; bril- 
liance, wit, esthetic objectivity contributed to making the sit- 
uation more relaxed, and yet everything remained within the 
bounds of the strictest propriety. While we jested this way in 
the regions of light conversation, there slumbered the possi- 
bility of putting the good maidens into a disastrously awk- 
ward situation with a single word. This possibility was in my 
power. The girls did not comprehend this, had scarcely an ink- 
ling of this. It was kept submerged at all times by the easy play 
of conversation, just as Scheherazade! held off the death sen- 
tence by telling stories. 


The Seducer’s Diary 423 


Sometimes I led the conversation to the edge of sadness; 
sometimes I let flippancy break loose; sometimes I tempted 
them out into a dialectical game. Indeed, what subject contains 
greater multiplicity, all according to how one looks at it. I con- 
tinually introduced new themes.'”? —I told of a girl whom the 
parents’ cruelty had forced to break an engagement. The un- 
happy collision almost brought tears to their eyes. —I told of 
a man who had broken an engagement and had given two 
grounds: that the girl was too big and that he had not knelt be- 
fore her when he confessed his love. When I protested to him 
that they could not possibly be regarded as adequate grounds, 
he replied, ‘Well, they are quite adequate to achieve what I 
want, for no one can give a reasonable reply to them.” —I sub- 
mitted a very difficult case for the assembly’s consideration. A 
young girl broke her engagement because she felt sure that she 
and her sweetheart were not compatible. The lover sought to 
bring her to her senses by assuring her how much he loved her; 
whereupon she answered: Either we are compatible and there 
is a real sympathy, and in that case you will perceive that we 
are not compatible, or we are not compatible, and in that case 
you will perceive that we are not compatible. It was amusing 
to see how the girls cudgeled their brains to grasp this enig- 
matic talk, and yet I clearly noticed that there were a couple of 
them who understood it superbly, for on the subject of break- 
ing an engagement every young miss is a born casuist. —Yes, 
I really do believe it would be easier for me to argue with the 
devil himself than with a young girl when the topic is: under 
what circumstances should an engagement be broken. 


Today I was with her. Precipitously, with the speed of 
thought, I immediately turned the conversation to the same 
subject with which I had occupied her yesterday, once again 
trying to make her enraptured. ““Yesterday, after I had gone, I 
thought of something I would have said.” It worked. As long 
as I am with her, she enjoys listening to me; after I am gone, 
she perceives very well that she is being deceived, that I am dif- 
ferent. In this way one withdraws one’s shares of stock. It is a 
disingenuous method but very expedient, as are all indirect 


[ 
391 


392 


424 Either/Or, I 


methods. She can very well understand that something such as 
we are discussing can occupy me; indeed, she herself finds it 
interesting at the moment, and yet I am cheating her of the es- 
sentially erotic.!% 


Oderint, dum metuant [Let them hate me, so they but fear 
me}, as if only fear and hate belong together, whereas fear 
and love have nothing to do with each other, as if it were not 
fear that makes love interesting. With what kind of love do we 
embrace nature? Is there not a secretive anxiety and horror in 
it, because its beautiful harmony works its way out of lawless- 
ness and wild confusion, its security out of perfidy? But pre- 
cisely this anxiety captivates the most. So also with love, if it 
is to be interesting. Behind it ought to brood the deep, anxious 
night from which springs the flower of love. Thus the nym- 
phaea alba [white water lily] rests with its calyx on the surface 
of the water, while thought is anxious about plunging down 
into the deep darkness where it has its root. —I have noticed 
that she always calls me “‘my”’ when she writes to me but does 
not have the courage to say it to me. Today, with as much in- 
sinuating and erotic warmth as possible, I beseeched her to do 
so. She began to do so; an ironic look, briefer and swifter than 
it takes to say it, was enough to make it impossible for her, al- 
though my lips did their utmost to encourage her. This mood 
is normal. 


She is mine. This I do not confide to the stars, according to 
custom; I really do not see of what concern this information 
can be to those remote globes. Neither do I confide it to any 
human being, not even to Cordelia. This secret I keep to my- 
self alone, whisper it, as it were, into myself in the most secre- 
tive conversations with myself. Her attempted resistance to 
me was not particularly great, but the erotic power she dis- 
plays is admirable. How interesting she is in this profound 
passionateness, how great she is—almost larger than life! How 
agile she is in escaping, how adroit in insinuating herself wher- 
ever she discovers a weak point! Everything is set in motion, 
but I find myself right in my element in this rioting of the ele- 
ments. And yet even in this agitation she is by no means un- 
beautiful, not torn to pieces in moods, not split up into frag- 


The Seducer’s Diary 425 


ments. She is always an Aphrodite, except that she does not 
rise up in naive loveliness or in unbefangen [disinterested] tran- 
quillity but is stirred by the strong pulsebeat of erotic love, al- 
though she nevertheless is unity and balance. Erotically, she is 
fully equipped for battle; she fights with the arrows of her 
eyes, with the command of her brow, with the secretiveness of 
her forehead, with the eloquence of her bosom, with the dan- 
gerous enticements of her embrace, with the appeal of her lips, 
with the smile of her cheeks, with the sweet longing of her 
whole being. There is a power in her, an energy, as if she were 
a Valkyrie, but this erotic plenitude of power is tempered in 
turn by a certain pining languor that suffuses her. —She must 
not be kept too long at this pinnacle where only anxiety and 
uneasiness support her and keep her from plunging down. 
Emotions such as these will soon make her feel that the en- 
gagement is too constricted, too hampering. She will herself 
become the temptress who seduces me into going beyond the 
boundary of the universal; in this way she will become con- 
scious of it herself, and for me that is primary. 


Quite a few remarks dropped from her side to indicate that 
she is tired of the engagement. They do not pass my ear un- 
noticed; they are the reconnoiterers of my enterprise in her 
soul that give me informative clues; they are the ends of the 
threads by which I am spinning her into my plan. 


My Cordelia, 

You complain about the engagement; you think that our 
love does not need an external bond, which is only a hin- 
drance. I thereby recognize at once my excellent Cordelia! I 
truly do admire you. Our outward union is still only a sepa- 
ration. There is still a partition that keeps us apart like Pyra- 
mus and Thisbe.’ There is still the disturbance of having 
others share our secret. Only in contrast is there freedom. 
Only when no alien suspects our love, only then does it have 
meaning; only when all outsiders think that the lovers hate 
each other, only then is love happy. 


Your JOHANNES 


I 
393 


394 


426 Either/Or, I 


Soon the bond of the engagement will be broken. She her- 
self will be the one who dissolves it, in order by this dissolu- 
tion to captivate me even more, if possible, just as flowing 
locks captivate more than those that are bound up. If I broke 
the engagement, I would miss out on this erotic somersault, 
which is so seductive to look at and such a sure sign of the au- 
dacity of her soul. For me, that is primary. Moreover, the 
whole incident would create for me some unpleasant conse- 
quences in connection with other people. I shall become un- 
popular, detested, loathed, although unjustly so, for would 
not many people derive some advantage from it? There is 
many a little miss who, failing to become engaged, would still 
be quite content to have been close to it. After all, it is some- 
thing, even though, to tell the truth, exceedingly little, for just 
when one has elbowed forward this way in order to obtain a 
place on the waiting list [Exspectance-List], the prospects 
[Exspectance] are dim; the higher one moves up, the further one 
advances, the dimmer the prospects. In the world of love, the 
principle of seniority does not hold with respect to advance- 
ment and promotion. In addition, such a little miss is bored by 
holding undivided possession of the property; she wants her 
life to be stirred by some event. But what can compare with an 
unhappy love affair, especially when, in addition, one can take 
the whole thing so lightly. So one makes oneself and the 
neighbors believe that one is among the victimized, and, not 
qualified to be accepted into a home for fallen women, one 
takes lodging next door as a wailer. People are duty-bound to 
hate me. 

In addition, there is still a class of those whom someone has 
deceived totally, one-half, or three-quarters. There are many 
gradations here, from those who have a ring as evidence to 
those who hang their hats on a handclasp in a square dance. 
Their wound is torn open again by the new pain. I accept their 
hate as a bonus. But, of course, all these haters are the same as 
crypto-lovers to my poor heart. A king without any territory 
is a ludicrous character, but a war of succession among a mob 
of pretenders to a kingdom without any territory goes beyond 
even the most ludicrous. Thus I really ought to be loved and 


The Seducer’s Diary 427 


cared for by the fair sex as a pawnshop is. '°°A person who is 
actually engaged can take care of only one, but such an exten- 
sive potentiality can take care of, that is, up to a point take care 
of, as many as you please. '’I escape all this finite nonsense and 
also have the advantage of being able to appear to others in a 
totally new role. The young girls will feel sorry for me, pity 
me, sigh for me. I play in the very same key, and in this way 
one can also make a catch. 


8Strangely enough, right now I note with distress that am 
getting the sign of denunciation Horace wished upon every 
faithless gir—a black tooth,!? moreover, a front one. How 
superstitious one can be! The tooth really disturbs me; I dislike 
any reference to it—it is a weak point I have. Although I am 
fully armed everywhere else, here even the biggest lout can 
give me a jolt that goes far deeper than he thinks when he re- 
fers to the tooth. I do everything to whiten it, but in vain. I say 
with Palnatoke: 


Iam rubbing it by day, by night, 
But cannot wipe out that black shadow.” 


Life does indeed have extraordinarily much that is enigmatic. 
Such a little circumstance can disturb me more than the most 
dangerous attack, the most painful situation. I would have it 
pulled out, but that would affect my speaking and the power 
of my voice. But if I do have it pulled out, I will have a false 
one put in—that is, it will be false to the world; the black one 
was false to me. 


201It is superb that Cordelia takes exception to an engage- 
ment. Marriage still is and will continue to be an honorable in- 
stitution, even though it does have the wearisome aspect of en- 
joying already in its youth a share of the honor that age 
provides. An engagement, however, is a strictly human inven- 
tion and as such is so significant and so ludicrous that on the 
one hand it is entirely appropriate that a young girl in the tu- 
mult of passion overrides it, and yet on the other hand she feels 
its significance, perceives the energy of her soul as a higher 
blood system everywhere present in herself. The point now is 


395 


396 


428 Either/Or, I 


to guide her in such a way that in her bold flight she entirely 
loses sight of marriage and the continent of actuality, so that 
her soul, as much in pride as in her anxiety about losing me, 
will destroy an imperfect human form in order to hurry on to 
something that is superior to the ordinarily human. But in this 
regard, I need have no fear, for her movement across life is al- 
ready so light and buoyant that actuality has already been lost 
sight of to a large extent. Moreover, I am indeed continually 
on board and can always stretch out the sails. 


202Woman still is and will continue to be an inexhaustible 
subject for contemplation for me, an everlasting overabund- 
ance for observations. The person who feels no need for this 
study can be whatever he wants to be in the world as far as I 
am concerned, but one thing he is not, he is no esthetician. 
What is glorious and divine about esthetics is that it is associ- 
ated only with the beautiful; essentially it deals only with 
belles lettres and the fair sex. It can give me joy, it can joy my 
heart, to imagine the sun of womanhood sending out its rays 
in an infinite multiplicity, radiating into a confusion of Jan- 
guages, where each woman has a little share of the whole king- 
dom of womanhood, yet in such a way that the remainder 
found in her harmoniously forms around this point. In this 
sense, womanly beauty is infinitely divisible. But the specific 
share of beauty must be harmoniously controlled, for other- 
wise it has a disturbing effect, and one comes to think that na- 
ture intended something with this girl, but that nothing ever 
came of it. 

My eyes can never grow weary of quickly passing over this 
peripheral multiplicity, these radiating emanations of wom- 
anly beauty. Every particular point has its little share and yet 
is complete in itself, happy, joyous, beautiful. Each one has 
her own: the cheerful smile, the roguish glance, the yearning 
eye, the tilted head, the frolicsome disposition, the quiet sad- 
ness, the profound presentiment, the ominous depression, the 
earthly homesickness, the unshriven emotions, the beckoning 
brow, the questioning lips, the secretive forehead, the alluring 
curls, the concealing eyelashes, the heavenly pride, the earthly 


The Seducer’s Diary 429 


modesty, the angelic purity, the secret blush, the light step, 
the lovely buoyancy, the languorous posture, the longing 
dreaminess, the unaccountable sighing, the slender figure, the 
soft curves, the opulent bosom, the curving hips, the tiny feet, 
the elegant hands. 

Each one has her own, and the one does not have what the 
other has. When I have seen and seen again, observed and ob- 
served again, the multiplicity of this world, when I have 
smiled, sighed, flattered, threatened, desired, tempted, 
laughed, cried, hoped, feared, won, lost—then I fold up the 
fan, then what is scattered gathers itself together into a unity, 
the parts into a whole. Then my soul rejoices, my heart 
pounds, passion is aroused. This one girl, the one and only in 
all the world, she must belong to me; she must be mine. Let 
God keep his heaven if I may keep her.?% I know very well 
what I am choosing; it is something so great that heaven itself 
cannot be served by sharing in this way, for what would be left 
in heaven if I kept her? The hopes of believing Mohammedans 
would be disappointed if in their paradise they embraced pale, 
feeble shadows, because they would not be able to find warm 
hearts, since all the warmth of the heart would be concentrated 
in her breast; they would despair inconsolably when they 
found pale lips, lusterless eyes, an inert bosom, a weak hand- 
clasp, for all the redness of the lips and fire of the eye and rest- 
lessness of the bosom and promise of the handclasp and inti- 
mation of the sighing and seal of the lips and quivering of the 
touch and passion of the embrace—all—all would be united in 
her, who squandered on me what would be sufficient for a 
world both here and to come. 

I have often thought on the matter in this way, but every 
time I think thus I always become warm because I imagine her 
as warm. Although warmth is generally considered a good 
sign, it does not follow from this that my mode of thinking 
will be conceded the honorable predicate that it is sound. 
Therefore, for variety, I, myself cold, shall imagine her as 
cold. I shall attempt to consider woman categorically. In 
which category is she to be placed? In the category of being- 
for-other.2°4 But this is not to be taken in the bad sense, as if 


397 


398 


430 Either/Or, I 


one who is for me is also for an other. Here one must, as al- 
ways in abstract thinking, abstain from every consideration of 
experience, for otherwise in the present instance I would in a 
curious way have experience both for and against me. Here as 
everywhere, experience is a curious character, for its nature is 
always to be both for and against. So she is being-for-other. 
Here in turn, from a different angle, we must not let ourselves 
be disturbed by experience, which teaches us that very seldom 
do we meet a woman who is truly being-for-other, since the 
great majority usually are not entities at all, either for them- 
selves or for others. She shares this qualification with all na- 
ture, with all femininity in general. All nature is only for-other 
in this way, not in the teleological sense, in such a way that one 
specific segment of nature is for a different specific segment, 
but the whole of nature is for-other—is for spirit. It is the same 
again with the particular. Plant life, for example, in all naiveté 
unfolds its hidden charms and is only for-other. Likewise, an 
enigma, a charade, a secret, a vowel, etc. are merely being-for- 
other. This explains why God, when he created Eve, had a 
deep sleep fall upon Adam, for woman is man’s dream. The 
story teaches us in another way that woman is being-for- 
other. That is, it says that Jehovah took one of man’s ribs. Ifhe 
had, for example, taken from man’s brain, woman would cer- 
tainly have continued to be being-for-other, but the purpose 
was not that she should be a figment of the brain but some- 
thing quite different. She became flesh and blood, but pre- 
cisely thereby she falls within the category of nature, which es- 
sentially is being-for-other. Not until she is touched by erotic 
love does she awaken; before that time she is a dream. But in 
this dream existence two stages can be distinguished: in the 
first, love dreams about her; in the second, she dreams about 
love. 

As being-for-other, woman is characterized by pure virgin- 
ity. That is, virginity is a being that, insofar as it is being-for- 
itself, is actually an abstraction and manifests itself only for- 
other. Feminine innocence has the same characteristic. There- 
fore, it can be said that woman in this state is invisible. It is 
well known that there was no image of Vesta,” the goddess 


The Seducer’s Diary 431 


who most closely represented true virginity. In other words, 
this form of existence is esthetically jealous of itself, just as Je- 
hovah is ethically jealous, and does not want any image to 
exist or even any idea of one. This is the contradiction—that 
which is for-other is not and, so to speak, first becomes visible 
through the other. Logically, this contradiction is entirely in 
order, and one who knows how to think logically will not be 
disturbed by it but will rejoice over it. But one who thinks il- 
logically will imagine that whatever is being-for-other is in the 
same finite sense as one can say of a particular thing: That is 
something for me. 

Woman’s being (the word ‘‘existence’’”” already says too 
much, for she does not subsist out of herself) is correctly des- 
ignated as gracefulness, an expression that is reminiscent of 
vegetative life; she is like a flower, as the poets are fond of say- 
ing,*°8 and even the intellectual [aandelige] is present in her in a 
vegetative way. She belongs altogether to the category of na- 
ture and for this reason is free only esthetically. In the deeper 
sense, she first becomes free [fri] through man, and therefore 
we say “to propose [at frie],”” and therefore man proposes. If he 
proposes properly, there can be no question of any choice. To 
be sure, woman chooses, but if this choice is thought of as the 
result of a long deliberation, then that kind of choosing is un- 
womanly. Therefore, it is a disgrace to be rejected, because the 
individual involved has overrated himself, has wanted to make 
another free without having the capacity to do so. 

In this relation there is profound irony. That which is for- 
other has the appearance of being dominant; man proposes, 
woman chooses. According to her concept, woman is the van- 
quished and man, according to his concept, the victor, and yet 
the victor submits to the defeated one; nevertheless this is al- 
together natural, and it is sheer boorishness, stupidity, and 
lack of erotic sensitivity to disregard that which follows di- 
rectly as a matter of course. This also has a deeper basis, 
namely, that woman is substance, man is reflection. There- 
fore, she does not choose without further ado; rather, man 
proposes, she chooses. But man’s proposal is a questioning; 
her choosing is actually an answer to a question. In a certain 


399 


432 Either/Or, I 


sense, man is more than woman, in another sense infinitely 
much less. 

This being-for-other is the pure virginity. If it makes an at- 
tempt itself to be in relation to another being that is being-for- 
it, then the opposite manifests itself in an absolute coyness, but 
this opposite also shows that woman’s true being is being-for- 
other. The diametrical opposite of absolute devotedness is ab- 
solute coyness, which conversely is invisible as the abstraction 
against which everything breaks, although the abstraction 
does not therefore come to life. Womanliness now assumes the 
quality of abstract cruelty, which is the caricaturing extreme of 
essential virginal Sprédigkeit [coyness]. A man can never be as 
cruel as a woman. A search of mythology, folktales, legends 
will confirm this. Ifa representation is to be given of a princi- 
ple of nature that in its ruthlessness knows no limits, then it is 
a feminine creature. Or one is terrified to read about a young 
girl who callously has her suitors liquidated, as one so fre- 
quently reads in the fairy tales of all peoples. On the wedding 
night, a Bluebeard kills all the girls he has loved, but he does 
not enjoy the killing of them; on the contrary, the enjoyment 
was antecedent, and therein lies the concretion—it is not cru- 
elty for the sake of cruelty alone. A Don Juan seduces them and 
abandons them, but he has enjoyment not in abandoning them 
but rather in seducing them; therefore, it is in no way this ab- 
stract cruelty. 

The more I deliberate on the matter, the more I see that my 
practice is in complete harmony with my theory. My practice, 
namely, has always been imbued with the conviction that 
woman is essentially being-for-other. The moment is so very 
significant here because being-for-other is always a matter of 
the moment. A longer or shorter time may pass before the 
moment arrives, but as soon as it has arrived, then that which 
originally was being-for-other assumes a relative being, and 
with that everything is finished. I am well aware that husbands 
sometimes say that woman is being-for-other in a quite differ- 
ent sense, that she is everything for them for the whole of life. 
Allowances must be made for husbands. I do believe that this 
is something that they make each other believe. Every class in 


The Seducer’s Diary 433 


life ordinarily has certain conventional ways and especially 
certain conventional lies. This traveler’s tale must be reckoned 
as one of those. To have an understanding of the moment”? is 
not such an easy matter, and the one who misunderstands it is 
doomed to boredom for life. The moment is everything, and 
in the moment woman is everything; the consequences I do 
not understand. One such consequence is having a child. 
Now, I fancy myself to be a fairly consistent thinker, but even 
if I were to go mad, I am not the man to think that conse- 
quence. I do not understand it at all—it takes a married man for 
such things. 

210Yesterday, Cordelia and I visited a family at their summer 
home. The people spent most of the time in the garden, where 
we amused ourselves with all kinds of physical exercise. One 
of the games we played was quoits [Ring]. When another 
gentleman who had been playing with Cordelia left, I seized 
the opportunity to take his place. What a wealth of loveliness 
she displayed, even more seductive in the graceful exertions of 
the game! What lovely harmony in the self-contradictions of 
her movements! How light she was, like a dance across the 
meadow! How vigorous, yet without needing resistance; how 
deceptive until her balance accounted for everything! How di- 
thyrambic her demeanor, how provocative her glance! Natu- 
rally, the game itself had a special interest for me. Cordelia did 
not seem to notice it. An allusion I made to one of those pres- 
ent about the beautiful custom of exchanging rings struck her 
soul like a lightning bolt. From that moment, a higher expla- 
nation pervaded the whole situation, a deeper significance per- 
meated it, a heightened energy inflamed her. I had both rings 
on my stick; I paused for a moment, exchanged a few words 
with those standing around us. She understood this pause. I 
tossed the rings to her again. A moment later, she caught both 
of them on her stick. She tossed both of them straight up into 
the air simultaneously, as if inadvertently, so that it was im- 
possible for me to catch them. This toss was accompanied by 
a look filled with unbounded daredeviltry. There is a story of 
a French soldier who had been in the Russian campaign and 
had to have his leg amputated because of gangrene. The very 


401 


434 E:ther/Or, I 


moment the agonizing operation was over, he seized the leg by 
the sole of the foot, tossed it up into the air, and shouted: Vive 
’empereur [Long live the emperor]. With a look such as that, 
she, even more beautiful than ever before, tossed both rings up 
into the air and said to herself: Long live erotic love. I deemed 
it inadvisable, however, to let her run riot in this mood or to 
leave her alone with it, out of fear of the letdown that often 
comes on its heels. Therefore, I remained very cool, as if I had 
noticed nothing, and with the help of those present con- 
strained her to keep on playing. Such behavior only gives her 
more elasticity. 


"111f any sympathy with explorations of this kind could be 
expected in our age, I would pose this question for a prize es- 
say: From the esthetic point of view, who is more modest, a 
young girl or a young wife, the inexperienced or the experi- 
enced; to whom does one dare to grant more freedom? But 
such things do not concern our earnest age. In Greece, such an 
investigation would have prompted universal attention; the 
whole state would have been set in motion, especially the 
young girls and the young wives. Our age would not believe 
this, but neither would our age believe it if it were told of the 
celebrated contest held between two Greek maidens?!” and the 
very painstaking investigation it occasioned, for in Greece 
such problems were not treated casually and light-mindedly, 
and yet everyone knows that Venus has an extra name on ac- 
count of this contest and that everyone admires the statue of 
Venus that has immortalized her. 

A married woman has two periods of her life in which she is 
interesting: her very earliest youth and again at long last when 
she has become very much older. But she also has a moment, 
and this must not be denied her, when she is even lovelier than 
a young girl, inspires even more honor. But this is a moment 
that seldom occurs in life; it is a picture for the imagination that 
does not need to be seen in life and perhaps is never seen. I 
imagine her as healthy, blooming, amply developed; in her 
arms she is holding a child, to whom all her attention is given, 
in the contemplation of whom she is absorbed. It is a picture 


The Seducer’s Diary 435 


that must be called the loveliest that human life has to display; 
it is anature myth, which therefore may be seen only in artistic 
portrayal, not in actuality. There must be no more figures in 
the picture either, no setting, which only interferes. If one goes 
to our churches, one will often have occasion to see a mother 
appear with a child in her arms. Apart from the disquieting 
crying of the child, apart from the uneasy thought about the 
parents’ expectations for the little one’s future based upon this 
crying of the infant, the surroundings in themselves interfere 
so much that even if everything else were perfect the effect 
would nevertheless be lost. The father is visible—a huge de- 
fect, since that cancels the myth, the charm. The earnest cho- 
rus of sponsors is visible—horrenda refero [I report dreadful 
things]?’7—and one sees nothing at all. Presented as a picture 
for the imagination, it is the loveliest of all. I do not lack the 
boldness and dash, or the brashness, to venture an assault—but 
if I were to see such a picture in actuality, I would be disarmed. 


214How Cordelia preoccupies me! And yet the time will 
soon be over; my soul always requires rejuvenation. | already 
hear, as it were, the rooster crowing in the distance. Perhaps 
she hears it, too, but she believes it is heralding the morning. 
—Why does a young girl have such beauty, and why does it 
last such a short time? That thought could make me very mel- 
ancholy, and yet it is really none of my business. Enjoy—do 
not chatter. Ordinarily, people who make a profession of such 
deliberations do not enjoy at all. But it does no harm to think 
about it, because this sadness—not for oneself but for others— 
usually makes one a bit more handsome in a masculine way. A 
sadness that like a veil of mist deceptively obscures manly 
strength is part of the masculine erotic. A certain depression in 
woman corresponds to this. 

215As soon as a girl has devoted herself completely, the 
whole thing is finished. I still always approach a young girl 
with a certain anxiety; my heart pounds, for I sense the eternal 
power that is in her nature. It has never occurred to me face to 
face with a married woman. The little bit of resistance she art- 
fully seeks to make is nothing. It is like saying that the married 


402 


436 Either/Or, I 


woman’s housecap is more impressive than the young girl’s 
uncovered head. ?!°That is why Diana?!” has always been my 
ideal. This pure virginity, this absolute coyness, has always 
occupied me very much. But although she has always held my 
attention, I have also always kept a suspicious eye on her. That 
is, I assume that she actually has not deserved all the eulogies 
upon her virginity that she has reaped. She knew, namely, that 
her game in life is bound up with her virginity; therefore it is 
preserved. To this is added that in a philological nook of the 
world I have heard murmurings that she had some idea of the 
terrible birth pangs her mother had experienced. This had 
frightened her, and for that I cannot blame Diana. I say with 
Euripides: I would rather go into battle three times than give 
birth once.?!8 J really could not fall in love with Diana, but Ido 
not deny that I would give a lot for a talk with her, for what I 
would call a candid conversation. She must have a bag full of 
all kinds of tricks. Obviously my good Diana in one way or 
another has knowledge that makes her far less naive than even 
Venus. I would not bother to spy on her in her bath, by no 
means, but I would like to spy on her with my questions. If] 
were sneaking off to a rendezvous where I had fears for my 
victory, I would prepare myself and arm myself, activate the 
spirits of the erotic by conversing with her. 


219 A question that has frequently been the subject of my con- 
sideration is: which situation, which moment, may be re- 
garded as the most seductive? The answer, of course, depends 
upon what and how one desires and how one is developed. I 
claim that it is the wedding day, and especially a particular mo- 
ment. When she is standing there adorned as a bride, and all 
her splendor nevertheless pales before her beauty, and she her- 
self in turn grows pale, when the blood stops, when the bosom 
is motionless, when the glance falters, when the foot hesitates, 
when the maiden trembles, when the fruit matures; when the 
heavens lift her up, when the solemnity strengthens her, when 
the promise carries her, when the prayer blesses her, when the 
myrtle crowns her; when the heart trembles, when the eyes 
drop, when she hides within herself, when she does not belong 


The Seducer’s Diary 437 


to the world in order to belong to it entirely; when the bosom 
swells, when the creation sighs, when the voice fails, when the 
tear quivers before the riddle is explained, when the torch is lit, 
when the bridegroom awaits—then the moment is present. 
Soon it is too late. There is only one step left, but this is just 
enough for a stumble. This moment makes even an insignifi- 
cant girl significant; even a little Zerlina”° becomes some- 
thing. Everything must be gathered together, the greatest con- 
trasts united in the moment; if something is lacking, especially 
one of the primary opposites, the situation promptly loses part 
of its seductiveness. There is a well-known etching that por- 
trays a penitent.”2! She looks so young and so innocent that 
one is almost embarrassed for her and the father confessor— 
what can she really have to confess? She lifts her veil slightly 
and looks out at the world as if she were seeking something 
that she perhaps could have the opportunity of confessing on 
a later occasion, and obviously it is nothing more than an ob- 
ligation out of solicitude for—the father confessor. The situa- 
tion is very seductive, and since she is the only figure in the 
picture there is nothing to prevent imagining the church in 
which all this takes place as being so spacious that several and 
very dissimilar preachers could preach there simultaneously. 
The situation is very seductive, and I have no objection to in- 
troducing myself into the background, especially if this slip of 
a girl has nothing against it. But it nevertheless remains a very 
minor situation, for the girl seems to be but a child in both re- 
spects, and consequently it will take time for the moment to 
arrive. 


222In my relation to Cordelia, have I been continually faith- 
ful to my pact? That is, my pact with the esthetic, for it is that 
which makes me strong—that I continually have the idea on 
my side. It is a secret like Samson’s hair, one that no Delilah 
can wrest from me.” Plainly and simply to deceive a girl, for 
that I certainly would not have the stamina; but the fact that 
the idea is present in motion, that I am acting in its service, that 
I dedicate myself to its service—this gives me rigorousness to- 
ward myself, abstinence from every forbidden pleasure. Has 


405 


438 Either/Or, I 


the interesting been preserved at all times? Yes—I dare to say 
that freely and openly in this secret conversation. The engage- 
ment itself was the interesting precisely because it did not yield 
that which is commonly understood as the interesting. It pre- 
served the interesting precisely through the contradiction be- 
tween the outward appearance and the inner life. If 1 had had a 
secret connection with her, it would have been interesting 
only to the first power. But this is the interesting raised to the 
second power, and therefore only then is it the interesting for 
her. The engagement is broken, but she herself breaks it in or- 
der to soar into a higher sphere. So it should be; this is pre- 
cisely the form of the interesting that will occupy her the most. 


September 16 

The bond has broken—full of longing, strong, bold, divine, 
she flies like a bird that now for the first time is allowed to 
spread its wings. Fly, bird, fly!** Truly, if this regal flight 
were a retreat from me, it would pain me very deeply. For me 
it would be the same as if Pygmalion’s beloved were changed 
to stone again.” Light have I made her, light as a thought, and 
should then this thought of mine not belong to me! It would 
be enough to despair over. A moment before, it would not 
have occupied me; a moment later, it will not concern me, but 
now—now—this now that is an eternity for me. But she is not 
flying away from me. Fly, then, bird, fly, rise proudly on your 
wings, glide through the delicate aerial kingdom; soon I shall 
be with you, soon I shall hide myself with you in deep soli- 
tude. 

The aunt was rather astonished at this news. But she is too 
broad-minded to want to coerce Cordelia, even though I have 
made some attempt to engage her interest on my behalf— 
partly to lull her into a deeper sleep and partly to tease Cordelia 
a little. She is, however, very sympathetic toward me; she 
does not suspect how much reason I have to decline all sym- 
pathy. 

She has received permission from her aunt to spend some 
time out in the country; she will visit a family. Fortunately, it 
so happens that she cannot immediately surrender to a glut of 


The Seducer’s Diary 439 


moods. For some time yet, she will be kept in tension by all 
kinds of resistance from without. I keep up a slight commu- 
nication with her through letters; in that way our relationship 
is coming to life again. She must now be made strong in every 
way; in particular it is best to let her make a couple of flour- 
ishes of eccentric contempt for men and for the universal. 
Then when the day for her departure arrives, a trustworthy 
fellow will show up as the driver. Outside the city gate, my 
highly trusted servant will join them. He will accompany 
them to their destination and remain with her to wait on her 
and help her in case of need. Next to myself, I know of no one 
better suited for that than Johan. I have personally arranged 
everything out there as tastefully as possible. Nothing is lack- 
ing that in any way can serve to beguile her soul and pacify it 
in luxuriant well-being. 


My Cordelia, 

Yet the cries of ‘‘Fire!”’ in individual families have not joined 
in a universal Capitolinian confusion of citywide shrieking. 
Probably you have already had to put up with a few solos. 
Imagine the whole gaggle of teatime talebearers and coffee 
gossips; imagine a presiding chairwoman, a worthy counter- 
part to that immortal President Lars in Claudius,”’ and you 
have a picture of and a notion of and a measure of what you 
have lost and with whom: the opinion of good people. 

Enclosed is the celebrated engraving that depicts President 
Lars.?28 ] was unable to purchase it separately, so I bought the 
complete Claudius, tore it out, and threw the rest away—for 
why should I venture to inconvenience you with a gift that 
means nothing to you at this moment; why should I not sum- 
mon everything to provide what could please you for just one 
moment; why should I permit more to be mixed up in a situ- 
ation than belongs to it? Nature has such a complexity, as does 
the person who is a slave to life’s finite relations, but you, my 
Cordelia, you will in your freedom hate it. 


Your JOHANNES 


407 


440 Either/Or, I 


Spring is indeed the most beautiful time to fall in love, au- 
tumn the most beautiful to attain the object of one’s desire. 
Autumn has a sadness that corresponds exactly to the move- 
ment whereby the thought of the fulfillment of a desire flows 
through a person. Today I myself have been out at the country 
house where in a few days Cordelia will find a setting that har- 
monizes with her soul. I myself do not wish to participate in 
her surprise and in her joy over it; such erotic episodes would 
only weaken her soul. But if she is alone in it, she will dream 
away; she will see hints everywhere, clues, an enchanted 
world. But all this would lose its significance if I were at her 
side; it would make her forget that for us the time is past when 
something like this enjoyed together had significance. This 
setting must not narcotically entrap her soul but continually 
allow it to soar aloft as she views it all as a game that means 
nothing compared with what is to come. During the days still 
remaining, I myself plan to visit this place more often in order 
to keep myself in the mood. 


My Cordelia, 

Now I truly call you my; no external sign reminds me of my 
possession. —Soon I shall truly call you my. And when I hold 
you clasped tightly in my arms, when you enfold me in your 
embrace, then we shall need no ring to remind us that we be- 
long to each other, for is not this embrace a ring that is more 
than a symbol? And the more tightly this ring encircles us, the 
more inseparably it knits us together, the greater the freedom, 
for your freedom consists in being mine, as my freedom con- 
sists in being yours. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

While he was hunting, Alpheus”? fell in love with the 
nymph Arethusa. She would not grant his request but contin- 
ually fled before him until on the island of Ortygia she was 
transformed into a spring. Alpheus grieved so much over this 
that he was transformed into a river in Elis in the Peloponne- 


The Seducer’s Diary 441 


sus. He did not, however, forget his love but under the sea 
united with that spring. Is the time of transformations past? 
Answer: Is the time of love past? To what can I compare your 
pure, deep soul, which has no connection with the world, ex- 
cept to a spring? And have I not told you that I am like a river 
that has fallen in love? And now when we are separated, do I 
not plunge under the sea in order to be united with you? There 
under the sea we shall meet again, for only in the deeps of the 
sea shall we really belong together. 


Your JOHANNES 


My Cordelia, 

Soon, soon you will be mine. “°When the sun shuts its vig- 
ilant eye, when history is over and the myths begin, I will not 
only throw my cloak around me but I will throw the night 
around me like a cloak and hurry to you and listen in order to 
find you—listen not for your footsteps but for the beating of 
your heart. 


Your JOHANNES 


During these days when I cannot be with her personally 
when I want to be, the thought has troubled me that it may 
occur to her at some moment to think about the future. It has 
never occurred to her before, because I have known too well 
how to anesthetize her esthetically. There is nothing more 
unerotic imaginable than this chattering about the future, 
which is due mainly to having nothing with which to fill up 
present time. If only I am with her, I have no fear about such 
things; no doubt I shall make her forget both time and eter- 
nity. Ifa man does not know how to establish rapport with a 
girl’s soul to that extent, he should never become involved in 
trying to beguile, for then it will be impossible to avoid the 
two reefs, questions about the future and catechizing about 
faith. 73! Therefore, it is entirely appropriate for Gretchen in 
Faus?*? to conduct a little examination of him, since Faust had 
been injudicious enough to disclose the knight in him, and 
against such an assault a girl is always armed. 


408 


442 Either/Or, I 


Now I believe that everything is arranged for her reception; 
she will not lack opportunity to admire my memory, or, more 
correctly, she will not have time to admire it. Nothing has 
been forgotten that could have any significance for her; on the 
other hand, nothing has been introduced that could directly re- 
mind her of me, although I am nevertheless invisibly present 
everywhere. But in large part the effect will depend upon how 
she happens to see it the first time. In that regard, my servant 
has received the most precise instructions, and in his way he is 
a perfect virtuoso. He knows how to drop a remark casually 
and nonchalantly if directed to do so; he knows how to be ig- 
norant—in short, he is invaluable to me. 

The location is just as she would like it. Sitting in the center 
of the room, one can look out on two sides beyond everything 
in the foreground; there is the limitless horizon on both sides; 
one is alone in the vast ocean of the atmosphere. If one moves 
nearer to a row of windows, a forest [Skov] looms far off on 
the horizon like a garland, bounding and inclosing. So it 
should be. What does erotic love [Elskov] love? —An enclo- 
sure. Was not paradise itself an enclosed place, a garden facing 
east?*33 —But it hedges one in too closely, this ring. One 
moves closer to the window—a calm lake hides humbly 
within the higher surroundings. At the edge there is a boat. A 
sigh out of the heart’s fullness, a breath from the mind’s un- 
rest. It works loose from its mooring, glides over the surface 
of the lake, gently moved by the soft breeze of ineffable long- 
ing. Rocked on the surface of the lake, which is dreaming 
about the deep darkness of the forest, one vanishes in the mys- 
terious solitude of the forest. —One turns to the other side, 
where the sea spreads out before one’s eyes, which are stopped 
by nothing and are pursued by thoughts that nothing detains. 
What does erotic love love? Infinity. —What does erotic love 
fear? Boundaries. 

Beyond this large room lies a smaller room or, more cor- 
rectly, a private room, for this was what the drawing room in 
the Wahl house approximated. The resemblance is striking. 
Matting woven of a special kind of willow covers the floor; in 
front of the sofa stands a small tea table with a lamp upon it, 


The Seducer’s Diary 443 


the mate to the one there at home. Everything is the same, 
only more sumptuous. This change I think I can permit myself 
to make in the room. In the large room there is a piano, a very 
plain one, but it brings to mind the piano at the Jansens. It is 
open. On the music holder, the little Swedish melody lies 
open. The door to the hall is slightly ajar. She comes in 
through the door in the back—Johan has been instructed about 
that. Then her eyes simultaneously take in the private room 
and the piano; recollection is aroused in her soul, and at the 
same moment Johan opens the door. —The illusion is perfect. 
She enters the private room. She is pleased; of that I am con- 
vinced. As her glance falls on the table, she sees a book; at that 
very instant, Johan picks it up as if to put it aside as he casually 
remarks: The gentleman must have forgotten it when he was 
out here this morning. From this she learns for the first time 
that I had already been there the day before, and then she wants 
to see the book. It is a German translation of the well-known 
work by Apuleius: Amor and Psyche. It is not a poetic work, 
but it should not be that either, for it is always an affront to a 
young girl to offer her a book of real poetry, as if she at such a 
moment were not herself sufficiently poetic to imbibe the po- 
etry that is immediately concealed in the factually given and 
that has not first gone through someone else’s thought. Usu- 
ally one does not think of this, and yet it is so.5 —She wants 
to read this book, and with that the goal is reached. —When 
she opens it to the place where it was last read, she will find a 
little sprig of myrtle, and she will also find that this means a 
little more than to be a bookmark. 


My Cordelia, 

What, fear? When we stay together, we are strong, stronger 
than the world, even stronger than the gods themselves. As 
you know, there once lived a race upon the earth who were hu- 
man beings, to be sure, but who were self-sufficient and did 
not know the intensely fervent union of erotic love [Elskov]. 
Yet they were powerful, so powerful that they wanted to as- 
sault heaven. Jupiter feared them and divided them in such a 
way that one became two, a man and a woman.”*° If it some- 


410 


411 


444 Either/Or, I 


times happens that what was once united is again joined in love 
[Kjerlighed], then such a union is stronger than Jupiter; they 
are then not merely as strong as the single individual was, but 
even stronger, for the union of love [Kjerlighed] is an even 
higher union. 


Your JOHANNES 


September 24 
37The night is still—the clock strikes a quarter to twelve— 
the hunter at the city gate blows his benediction out across the 
countryside, and it echoes from Blegdam; he enters the gate— 
he blows again, and it echoes from still farther away. —Every- 
thing sleeps in peace, but not erotic love [Elskov].8 Arise, 
then, you mysterious powers of erotic love, concentrate your- 
selves in this breast! The night is silent—a solitary bird breaks 
this silence with its cry and the beat of its wings as it sweeps 
over the misty field toward the slope of the embankment; no 
doubt it, too, is hastening to a rendezvous—accipio omen [I ac- 
cept the omen]!?3? —How ominous all nature is! ] take auguries 
from the flight of the birds, from their cries, from the frolic- 
some slap of the fish on the surface of the water, from their 
vanishing into the depths, from the faraway baying of a dog, 
from the rattling of a carriage in the distance, from footsteps 
echoing far off. At this hour of the night, I do not see ghosts; 
in the bosom of the lake, in the kiss of the dew, in the fog that 
spreads out over the earth and hides its fertile embrace, I do not 
see what has been but what is to come. Everything is a meta- 
phor; I myself am a myth about myself, for is it not as a myth 
that I hasten to this tryst? Who I am is irrelevant; everything 
finite and temporal is forgotten; only the eternal remains, the 
power of erotic love, its longing, its bliss. How responsive is 
my soul, like a taut bow, how ready are my thoughts, like ar- 
rows in my quiver, not poisoned, and yet able to blend with 
blood. How vigorous, sound, and happy is my soul, as pres- 
ent as a god. 
She was beautiful by nature. I thank you, marvelous nature! 
Like a mother, you have watched over her. Thank you for 


The Seducer’s Diary 445 


your solicitude. Unspoiled she was. I thank you, you human 
beings to whom she owed this. Her development—that was 
my work—soon I shall enjoy my reward. —How much I have 
gathered into this one moment that is now at hand! Damned if 
T should fail now! 

As yet I do not see my carriage. —I hear the crack of the 
whip; it is my driver. —Drive on for dear life, even if the 
horses collapse, but not one second before we reach the place. 


September 25 

Why cannot such a night last longer? If Alectryon?*° could 
forget himself, why cannot the sun be sympathetic enough to 
do so? But now it is finished, and J never want to see her again. 
When a girl has given away everything, she is weak, she has 
lost everything, for in a man innocence is a negative element, 
but in woman it is the substance of her being. Now all resist- 
ance is impossible, and to love is beautiful only as long as re- 
sistance is present; as soon as it ceases, to love is weakness and 
habit. I do not want to be reminded of my relationship with 
her; she has lost her fragrance, and the times are past when a 
girl agonizing over her faithless lover is changed into a heli- 
otrope.*4! I shall not bid her farewell; nothing is more revolt- 
ing than the feminine tears and pleas that alter everything and 
yet are essentially meaningless.*4? I did love her, but from now 
on she can no longer occupy my soul. If I were a god, I would 
do for her what Neptune did for a nymph: transform her into 
a man.* 

Yet it would really be worth knowing whether or not one 
could poetize oneself out of a girl in such a way as to make her 
so proud that she imagined it was she who was bored with the 
relationship. It could be a very interesting epilogue, which in 
and by itself could have psychological interest and besides that 
furnish one with many erotic observations.”# 
